Álvaro Uribe - Wikipedia






























Jump to content







Main menu





Main menu
move to sidebar
hide



		Navigation
	


Main pageContentsCurrent eventsRandom articleAbout WikipediaContact us





		Contribute
	


HelpLearn to editCommunity portalRecent changesUpload fileSpecial pages



















Search











Search






















Appearance
















Donate

Create account

Log in








Personal tools






Donate


Create account


Log in





























Contents
move to sidebar
hide




(Top)





1
Early life and education








2
Political career




Toggle Political career subsection





2.1
Senator of Colombia








2.2
Governor of Antioquia








2.3
2002 presidential election










3
Presidency (2002–2010)




Toggle Presidency (2002–2010) subsection





3.1
Internal conflict








3.2
Colombian parapolitics scandal








3.3
Wiretapping scandal








3.4
International relations








3.5
Socio-economic policy








3.6
Referendum for reelection








3.7
Reelection proposal








3.8
2006 presidential elections








3.9
Bribery investigation








3.10
Popularity








3.11
2010 third term proposal










4
Post-presidency




Toggle Post-presidency subsection





4.1
Senator of Colombia (2014–2020)








4.2
Home detention








4.3
"False positives" scandal








4.4
Political endorsement










5
Awards




Toggle Awards subsection





5.1
National awards








5.2
Foreign awards








5.3
Other awards










6
See also








7
References








8
External links


















Toggle the table of contents







Álvaro Uribe



54 languages




AfrikaansالعربيةمصرىAsturianuAzərbaycancaБеларуская (тарашкевіца)БеларускаяБългарскиCatalàČeštinaDanskDeutschΕλληνικάEsperantoEspañolEestiEuskaraفارسیSuomiFrançaisGàidhligGalegoGaelgעבריתBahasa IndonesiaIdoItaliano日本語ქართული한국어LatinaLietuviųMalagasyNederlandsNorsk nynorskNorsk bokmålOccitanPolskiPortuguêsRuna SimiRomânăРусскийScotsSimple EnglishShqipСрпски / srpskiSvenskaTürkçeУкраїнськаاردوTiếng ViệtYorùbá粵語中文

Edit links











ArticleTalk





English

















Read

Edit

View history









Tools





Tools
move to sidebar
hide



		Actions
	



Read


Edit


View history






		General
	


What links hereRelated changesUpload filePermanent linkPage informationCite this pageGet shortened URLSwitch to legacy parser





		Print/export
	


Download as PDFPrintable version





		In other projects
	


Wikimedia CommonsWikidata item






















Appearance
move to sidebar
hide










From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia



President of Colombia from 2002 to 2010
In this Hispanic American name, the first or paternal surname is  Uribe and the second or maternal family name is  Vélez.

Álvaro UribeCYCUribe in 200732nd President of ColombiaIn office7 August 2002 – 7 August 2010Vice PresidentFrancisco Santos CalderónPreceded byAndrés Pastrana ArangoSucceeded byJuan Manuel SantosSenator of ColombiaIn office20 July 2014 – 18 August 2020In office20 July 1986 – 20 July 1994Governor of AntioquiaIn office1 January 1995 – 1 January 1998Preceded byRamiro ValenciaSucceeded byAlberto Builes OrtegaMayor of MedellínIn officeAugust 1982 – December 1982Appointed byÁlvaro Villegas MorenoPreceded byJose Jaime Nicholls SánchezSucceeded byJuan Felipe Gaviria Gutierrez
Personal detailsBornÁlvaro Uribe Vélez (1952-07-04) 4 July 1952 (age 73)Medellín, Antioquia, ColombiaPartyDemocratic Center(since 2013)Other politicalaffiliationsSocial Party of National Unity (2010–2013)Colombia First (2001–2010)Liberal (1977–2001)Spouse
Lina María Moreno Mejía
​ ​(m. 1979)​Children2Alma materUniversity of AntioquiaAwards
Medal of the Oriental Republic of Uruguay (2003)
Light unto the nations award (2007)
Presidential Medal of Freedom (2009)
Gold Mercury International Award (2009)
SignatureWebsiteOfficial website
Álvaro Uribe Vélez CYC (born 4 July 1952) is a Colombian politician who served as the 32nd President of Colombia from 7 August 2002 to 7 August 2010.[1][2] He is a member and leader of the right-wing political party Democratic Center.
Uribe started his political career in his home department of Antioquia. He held offices in the Public Enterprises of Medellín and in the Ministry of Labor, and directed the Special Administrative Unit of Civil Aeronautics (1980–1982). He became the Mayor of Medellín in October 1982. He served as a senator between 1986 and 1994, and as the Governor of Antioquia between 1995 and 1997, before being elected President of Colombia in 2002.
Following his 2002 election, Uribe led an all-out military offensive against terrorist groups such as the FARC and the ELN with funding and backing from the Clinton and Bush administrations in the form of a US$2.8 billion direct foreign aid package called "Plan Colombia". He also led an effort to demobilize the right-wing paramilitary group known as the AUC.  His defense minister Juan Manuel Santos played a significant role in his administration and led large-scale alleged executions, resulting in thousands of civilians were killed by the Colombian army, as part of the "false positives" scandal, with almost total impunity. Their deaths are being investigated by the United Nations.[3][when?]
In August 2010, Uribe was appointed vice-chairman of the UN panel investigating the Gaza flotilla raid.[4] In 2012 Uribe and a group of political allies founded the right-wing Democratic Center movement to contest the 2014 national elections.[5] He was elected senator in the 2014 parliamentary election and took office in July 2014. Uribe was critical of his successor Juan Manuel Santos's appeasement efforts with the FARC terrorists.[6]
In August 2020, the Supreme Court of Justice of Colombia ordered his arrest as part of an investigation into bribery and witness tampering.[1][2] The case went to the Attorney General, after which Uribe resigned from his Senate seat. He was convicted on 28 July 2025 but it was overturned on appeal in October 2025. A number of his political opponents have claimed for years that Uribe should be prosecuted, alleging he has ties with paramilitarism.[7][8][9] Under Uribe's presidency, he oversaw democratic backsliding in Colombia.[10]
Early life and education[edit]
Álvaro Uribe was born in Medellín, the oldest of five children. His father, Alberto Uribe Sierra, was a landowner. When he was 10, his family left their Salgar ranch and moved to Medellín. He graduated in 1970 from the Instituto Jorge Robledo, after being expelled from the Medellín Benedictine School for arguing with the Benedictine monks.[11]
Uribe studied law at the University of Antioquia and graduated in 1977. His father was killed by a guerrilla group during kidnapping attempt in 1983.[12][13][14] After his father's death, Uribe focused on his political career and became a member of the Colombian Liberal Party. Uribe was appointed mayor of Medellín by Antioquia governor Álvaro Villegas in 1982, although he only held the post for five months as he resigned for reasons that remain controversial. According to Villegas, then President Belisario Betancur pressured the governor to ask for his resignation because he claimed that Uribe had links to the Medellín Cartel.[15][16]
28th President of Harvard University Drew Gilpin Faust and Michael Shinagel are seen here with Álvaro Uribe at Harvard University Extension School Centennial Convocation in 2009.
In 1993, he attended Harvard University, receiving a Certificate of Special Studies in Administration and Management from Harvard Extension School and a Certificate in Negotiation and Dispute Resolution from Harvard Law School.[17] Between 1998 and 1999, after having completed his term in office as the governor of Antioquia, he studied at St Antony's College, Oxford, England, on a Chevening-Simón Bolívar scholarship[18] and was appointed Senior Associate Member at St Antony's College.[19]
Uribe married Lina María Moreno Mejía in 1979.[citation needed] They have two sons, Tomás and Jerónimo.[20]
Political career[edit]
This section of a biography of a living person needs additional citations for verification. Please help by adding reliable sources. Contentious material about living persons that is unsourced or poorly sourced must be removed immediately from the article and its talk page, especially if potentially libelous.Find sources: "Álvaro Uribe" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR (June 2016) (Learn how and when to remove this message)
In 1976, at the age of 24, Uribe was Chief of Assets for the Public Utilities of Medellín (Empresas Públicas de Medellín).[21] He served as Secretary General of the Ministry of Labor under Alfonso López Michelsen from 1977 to 1978.[21] During this time, he married Lina Moreno, a philosopher from Medellín[citation needed]. President Julio César Turbay named him Director of Civil Aviation from 1980 to 1982, at the age of 28, after the previous director was assassinated.[22][21] He was appointed Mayor of Medellín in 1982,[21] but was removed five months later due to alleged connections with drug cartels.[23]
Senator of Colombia[edit]
Uribe was elected one of Antioquia's senators from 1986 to 1990, and again from 1990 to 1994. As senator, he served as president of the Seventh Commission[clarification needed] and he supported laws dealing with reform of pensions, labor and social security, as well as promotion of administrative careers, cooperative banking, brown sugar, and protection for women. Some of the legislation later drew criticism, in particular some which reduced the state's responsibility for social security. During his later term, he received official and unofficial awards as one of the "best senators" (1990, 1992 and 1993) and as the senator with the "best legislative initiatives" (1992).[21]
Governor of Antioquia[edit]
He was elected governor of the department of Antioquia for the 1995 to 1997 term. During his term, Uribe developed what he described as a model for a communitarian state, where in theory, citizens would participate in the administration's decision making. It was claimed that this model would help improve employment, education, administrative transparency and public security.
Within his jurisdiction, Uribe openly supported a national program of licensed private security services[24] that became known as CONVIVIR, which had been created by Decree 356 issued by the Colombian Defense Ministry in February 1994. The groups quickly became controversial – while some reportedly improved security in communities and intelligence coordination with the military, their members were accused of abusing civilians and operated without serious oversight. In 1998, Human Rights Watch stated: "we have received credible information that indicated that the CONVIVIR groups of the Magdalena Medio and of the southern Cesar regions were directed by known paramilitaries and had threatened to assassinate Colombians who were considered as guerrilla sympathizers or who refused to join the cooperative groups".[24][25][26][27]
2002 presidential election[edit]
Main article: 2002 Colombian presidential election
See also: 1999–2002 FARC–Government peace processThis section of a biography of a living person does not include any references or sources. Please help by adding reliable sources. Contentious material about living persons that is unsourced or poorly sourced must be removed immediately, especially if potentially libelous or harmful. (August 2020) (Learn how and when to remove this message)Uribe's presidential campaign poster. The slogan reads: "firm hand, big heart".
Uribe ran as an independent liberal candidate, having unofficially separated from his former party. His electoral platform centered on confronting Colombia's main guerrilla movement, the FARC. Other relevant propositions included slashing the national administration's expenses, fighting corruption and initiating a national referendum to resolve several of the country's political and economic concerns.
Colombia's government under President Andres Pastrana had engaged in peace negotiations with the largest guerrilla group, the FARC, but after four years of peace negotiations without cease-fires, disapproval of Colombia's main parties grew. Violence was rampant. The FARC claimed they had taken control of some 100 municipalities of Colombia out of 1093 at that moment. Kidnappings were common and were among the highest in the world, as well as the assassination and crime rate. The AUC was also gaining influence, and expanding its massacres and illicit drugs production, competing with FARC, ELN and other narco-traffickers.
Until at least 2001, polls showed that at most 2% of the electorate contemplated voting for Uribe and that the Liberal Party's Horacio Serpa would probably win. But public mood shifted in his favor after the peace process with the guerrillas degenerated. The administration of President Andrés Pastrana had failed for four years to secure a cease-fire, and Uribe began to be seen as a candidate who might provide a viable security program. Former General Harold Bedoya, a candidate with a superficially similar program, remained marginalized.
Uribe was elected President of Colombia in the first round of 26 May 2002 elections with 53% of the popular vote. His running mate was Francisco Santos Calderón, a member of the Santos family, who have a long-lasting tradition as members of the Colombian Liberal Party and as owners of Colombian daily newspaper El Tiempo. Santos was also one of the founders of the anti-kidnapping NGO Fundación País Libre, created shortly after his own experience as a hostage of drug lord Pablo Escobar. Observers considered the elections mostly free of foul play at the national level, but there were instances of active intimidation of voters and candidates, by the actions of guerrilla and paramilitary groups. 47% of the potential electorate voted, down from the previous round of voting.
Some of Uribe's opponents made accusations during his campaign, especially in a speech by Horacio Serpa and a book published by Newsweek's Joseph Contreras, who interviewed Uribe that year. Claims centered on Uribe's alleged past personal relationships with members of the Medellín Cartel and the sympathy that some paramilitary spokesmen expressed towards Uribe as a candidate. Uribe and his supporters denied or undermined these claims, and critics are committed to legal actions ongoing.
Former paramilitary Salvatore Mancuso, commander of the AUC, admitted in 2023 that his organisation had supported Álvaro Uribe's presidential campaign in 2002.[28]
Presidency (2002–2010)[edit]
Main article: Presidency of Álvaro Uribe
Part of a series onConservatism in Colombia
Ideologies
Christian democracy
Liberal
Economic
Populist
Uribismo

Principles
Anti-communism
Colombian culture
Family values
Free trade (factions)
Law and order
Nationalism
Property rights
Protectionism (factions)

History
Gran Colombia
Regeneration
La Violencia

People
Arango
Bolívar
Borrero
Caro (José)
Caro (Miguel)
Núñez
Pérez
Rodríguez
Suárez
Toro
Uribe

Parties
Active
Colombian Conservative Party
Colombia Justa Libres
Democratic Centre
MIRA
New Democratic Force
Defunct
Colombia First
National Salvation Movement
Somos Región Colombia

Media
El Colombiano

Related topics
Politics of Colombia
Liberalism

 Colombia portal
 Conservatism portalvte
Internal conflict[edit]
During his tenure, Uribe's declared priority was to contain or defeat the three main armed groups in Colombia, the United Self-Defense Forces of Colombia (AUC), National Liberation Army (ELN), and FARC.[citation needed] And by the end of his first term in office the AUC had other right-wing militias agree to disarm and go to jail under special sentences of seven years.[29]
Uribe stated that the government had to first show military superiority to eventually make the guerrillas return to the negotiating table with a more flexible position, even if this would only happen after his term in office expired. Early in his government, he was quoted as saying that Colombia's main concerns were the challenges of terrorism and the narcotics trade.[30] In a dialog with BBC's Talking Point, Uribe stated: "Of course we need to eliminate social injustice in Colombia but what is first? Peace. Without peace, there is no investment. Without investment, there are no fiscal resources for the government to invest in the welfare of the people".[31]
His security program was based on a policy of democratic security, aiming to:
Gradually restore police presence in all municipalities.
Increase judicial action against crimes of high social impact.
Strengthen public institutions.
Reduce human rights violations.
Dismantle terrorist organizations (especially armed rebel groups; the main one is the FARC-EP).
Reduce kidnappings and extortion.
Reduce homicide levels.
Prevent forced displacement and facilitating the return of forcefully-displaced people.
Continue to fight the illegal drug trade through interdiction, eradication and judicial action.
The policy intended to achieve these goals by:
Engaging the civilian population more actively.
Supporting soldiers.
Increasing intelligence capacity.
Reinstating control over national roads.
Demobilizing illegal groups.
Integrating the armed forces services.
Increasing defense spending.[32]

In early 2002, Uribe's administration decreed a one-time tax of 1.2% of the liquid assets of the higher-income Colombians and corporations, with the goal of raising US$800 million. More than $650 million was collected before the final payment quota was made, surpassing original expectations. Another goal was to increase defense expenditures from a current level of about 3.6% of GDP to 6% of GDP by 2006.[32] According to official government statistical information from August 2004, in two years, homicides, kidnappings, and terrorist attacks in Colombia decreased by as much as 50% – their lowest levels in almost 20 years. In 2003, there were 7,000 fewer homicides than in 2002 – a decrease of 27%.[citation needed] By April 2004, the government had established permanent police or military presence in every Colombian municipality for the first time in decades.[33]
The Colombian Embassy in Washington states that, as a result of this policy, the Colombian armed forces would now have: "60% more combat-ready soldiers than four years ago; Helicopters which have significantly improved the mobility of the Armed Forces throughout the national territory; Attack helicopters ensuring the means to be more aggressive in the fight against FARC and AUC; Increased basic combat supplies, including rifles and ammunition; and [has received] significant less human rights complaints against them".[32]
In January 2005, Human Rights Watch stated: "Paramilitary groups maintain close ties with a number of Colombian military units. The Uribe administration has yet to take effective action to break these ties by investigating and prosecuting high-ranking members of the armed forces credibly alleged to have collaborated with paramilitary groups. Credible reports indicate that some of the territories from which the military has ejected the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (Fuerzas Armadas Revolutionarias de Colombia, FARC) are now under the control of paramilitary groups, which continue to carry out indiscriminate attacks on the civilian population".[34]
A February 2005 report by the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights on the year 2004 stated: "Achievements and advances were observed in the field of human rights and international humanitarian law; however, there were also difficulties and contradictions. ... Progress was recorded in terms of prevention and protection, including strengthening of the mechanism of community defenders and the early warning system, as well as regarding the Ministry of the Interior's programs for the protection of vulnerable groups. Weaknesses persisted in the Government's responses to warnings, as well as in decreasing risk factors for vulnerable groups. The Government adopted positive measures regarding the destruction of stored anti-personnel mines. The armed forces occasionally carried out operations in which they failed to observe humanitarian principles".[35]
An anti-terror statute criticized by many human rights groups was approved by Congress on 11 December 2003 but was struck down in August 2004 by the Colombian Constitutional Court during its review. The statute granted the military judicial police rights and allowed limited arrests and communication intercepts without warrants. It was struck down due to an error in the approval procedure, an objection the court has also presented towards other bills.[36]
After some of the AUC's main leaders had declared a cease-fire and agreed to concentrate in Santa Fe de Ralito, several paramilitary demobilizations began in earnest, thousands of their "rank and file" fighters were disarmed and incorporated into government rehabilitation programs late in 2004. The main AUC leaders, who would be held responsible for atrocities, remained in the concentration zone and continued talks with the government's High Commissioner for Peace, Luis Carlos Restrepo. A number of the paramilitary members who initially demobilized in Medellín apparently did not actually belong to the AUC and this caused public concern. The AUC commanders claimed, as the year ended, that they had difficulties controlling all of their personnel from their isolated position, that they had already demobilized some 20% of their forces, and that they would await for the drafting of the necessary legal framework before making any more significant moves.
In 2005, Uribe and Colombia's congressmen prepared for the elections held in May and March 2006 respectively. FARC, which had been perceived as relatively passive, began to show signs of what analysts considered renewed vigor in February.[citation needed] It made a series of attacks against small military units, which left at least three dozen casualties. Uribe said in a speech that FARC remained strong and had never retreated, and he credited Colombia's soldiers for previous successes against FARC activities.
Negotiations with the AUC also increased public anxiety. Discussions continued about the legal provisions to assure "justice, reparation and truth" after a full demobilization. Also according to many observers, paramilitary activity continued despite AUC's declared cease-fire, albeit at a reduced rate. The demobilizations were renewed in November and finished in the complete disbandment of the group by middle February 2007, although some of the paramilitary units rejected disbandment and returned to criminal activity. These groups became known as the Black Eagles. This group is relatively small in comparison to the AUC and have not been able to achieve the notoriety or the military power of their predecessor, but are present on some former paramilitary areas, like Catatumbo and Choco.[37]
The Colombian Congress agreed to prosecute AUC leaders under the controversial Justice and Peace Law, by which the paramilitary leaders would receive reduced sentences in exchange for their testimony and declarations of their entire criminal activity: links with drug dealers, assassinations, disappearances and massacres.[38] These declarations are to be brought before a specialized judge, in a public hearing attended by the victims. The paramilitary leaders are also forced to "repair" the damage caused to the victims or their families: By disclosing the location of mass graves and by repaying each of them through economic assistance. As of 2008, these public hearings are still underway.
To improve its results in the fight against guerrilla warfare, the Colombian army carried out mass executions of civilians transformed into false positives. If exactions of this kind already existed, the phenomenon became widespread from 2002, encouraged by the bonuses paid to the soldiers and by quasi-absolute impunity.[39][40] In 2010 a mass grave containing 2,000 corpses was discovered near a military base in the department of Meta. This is the largest mass grave discovered to date in South America.[41]
In 2008, the Working Group on Enforced or Involuntary Disappearances of the United Nation's Human Rights Council criticised the continuation of forced disappearances in Colombia.[42] According to the CODHES human rights NGO, forced displacement during Uribe's term affected over 2.4 million Colombian nationals by the end of 2009. A spokesperson for the organization stated: "It's true that there have been advances for some segments of society, but not for everyone, which casts into doubt the democratic component of (the government's) security policy".[43] From 2000 to 2008, more than 130.000 Colombian nationals fled to Ecuador.[44] According to the International Displacement Monitoring Centre, an estimated total of 3.303.979 to 4.915.579 people have been internally displaced in Colombia.[45]
Colombian parapolitics scandal[edit]
Main article: Colombian parapolitics scandal
In November 2006, a political crisis emerged as several of Uribe's congressional supporters were questioned or charged by the Colombian Supreme Court and the office of the Attorney General for having alleged links to paramilitary groups. Álvaro Araújo, brother of Uribe's Foreign Minister María Consuelo Araújo, was among those summoned for questioning.[46] In November, the former ambassador to Chile, Salvador Arana, was charged with the murder of a mayor in a small town in the Department of Sucre.[47] The Supreme Court sentenced Arana to 40 years in prison in December 2009.[48]
In April 2007, Senator Gustavo Petro made several accusations against Uribe during a televised congressional debate about paramilitarism in Antioquia. Petro said that some of the Uribe family's farms in the north of the country had been previously used as staging grounds for paramilitary forces. He also showed a picture of Santiago Uribe, the President's brother, together with Fabio Ochoa, a drug dealer, in 1985. Petro also argued that Governor Uribe's office allowed paramilitary personnel to participate in some of the legal cooperative neighborhood watch groups known as CONVIVIR. Another accusation concerned the possible participation of a helicopter belonging to the former Antioquia Governor's administration during a paramilitary massacre.[49]
Two days later, Uribe publicly revealed that former US Vice President Al Gore had canceled his participation in a pro-environment event Uribe was to attend in Miami due to the continuing allegations against him. The Colombian President reacted by organizing a press conference during which he addressed several of the accusations Senator Petro and others had made against him. Uribe argued that his family had nothing to do with any massacres and that they had already sold the implicated farms several years before the alleged events. He also stated that the Uribes and the Ochoas were both famous in the horse breeding business, causing their meetings to be both common and public. He claimed that the helicopter's hours and missions had been strictly logged, making it impossible for it to have participated in any massacre. Uribe said that he supported the CONVIVIR groups but was not solely responsible for their creation, adding that other civilian and military authorities also participated in their oversight. He also said that he dismantled some CONVIVIR groups when doubts began to surround their activities.[49][50]
On 22 April 2008, former senator Mario Uribe Escobar, one of the Colombian President's cousins and a close political ally, was arrested after being denied asylum at the Costa Rican embassy in Bogotá, as part of a judicial inquiry into the links between politicians and paramilitary groups. Mario Uribe has been accused of meeting with paramilitary commander Salvatore Mancuso to plan land seizures.[51] On 22 February 2011, Uribe Escobar was convicted and sentenced to 90 months in jail after the Colombian Supreme Court found him guilty of the charge of conspiring with paramilitary groups.[52]
On 23 April 2008, Uribe revealed that a former paramilitary fighter had accused him of helping to plan the 1997 massacre of El Aro, a charge which he said was under official investigation. Uribe described the accuser as a "disgruntled convict with an axe to grind", denied the charges and said there was proof of his innocence.[53] The Colombian newsweekly Revista Semana reported that the paramilitary in question, Francisco Enrique Villalba Hernández, had not mentioned Uribe during previous declarations made more than five years ago, when he was sentenced for his own role in the massacre. The magazine also listed a number of possible inconsistencies in his most recent testimony, including the alleged presence of General Manosalva, who had died months before the date of the meeting where the massacre was planned.[54]
Wiretapping scandal[edit]
In May 2009 Colombian prosecutors officially began an investigation on a series of illegal wiretapping and spying activities carried out against opposition politicians, judges, journalists and others by the Administrative Department of Security (DAS).[55] The probe has involved several of Uribe's top aides and former high-ranking personnel within the department.[55] Former DAS counterintelligence director Jorge Alberto Lagos has told investigators that information on the country's Supreme Court judges was provided to Bernardo Moreno and José Obdulio, two of Uribe's aides.[55] Gaviria has claimed that criminals have tried to damage the government's image as part of a "political war" against the administration.[55] El Tiempo has criticized these explanations, raising questions about the President's knowledge of these activities.[55] Uribe himself has denied ordering any illegal wiretapping and claims that those responsible for spying on the opposition are part of "a mafia group that hurts the Colombian Democracy, freedom, the country and the government itself".[56] The DAS, an "intelligence service that answers to the president" as described by the Washington Post,[55] has been the subject of earlier controversies during the Uribe administration. According to Revista Semana, revelations about the infiltration of paramilitaries affected the entity under former DAS chief Jorge Noguera in 2007 and further accusations have continued to surface.[57] The magazine reported that information gathered by the DAS has been allegedly forwarded to paramilitaries, narcotraffickers and guerrillas.[57] Previously, former DAS computer systems chief Rafael García had claimed that the department and Colombian paramilitaries were involved in a plan to assassinate Venezuelan President Hugo Chávez.[58] According to Reporters Without Borders, Colombia was demoted from 114th to 145th place between 2002 and 2010 on freedom of the press.
International relations[edit]
Uribe's administration was responsible for arresting and extraditing more drug traffickers to the United States and to other countries than all other previous presidents. He has been publicly recognized as a supporter of the US war on drugs by continually implementing the anti-drug strategy of Plan Colombia.[citation needed] He is also recognized as a supporter of the US war on terror, and the invasion of Iraq. In January 2003, Uribe ended a radio interview by asking "why isn't there any thought of [making] an equivalent deployment [as in the invasion of Iraq] to put an end to this problem [the Colombian conflict], which has such potentially grave consequences?".[59]
In a 22 November visit to the coastal city of Cartagena, US President George W. Bush stood by the results of Uribe's security policies and declared he would continue to provide Plan Colombia aid in the future: "My nation will continue to help Colombia prevail in this vital struggle. Since the year 2000, when we began Plan Colombia, the United States has provided more than $3 billion in vital aid. We'll continue providing aid. We've helped Colombia to strengthen its democracy, to combat drug production, to create a more transparent and effective judicial system, to increase the size and professionalism of its military and police forces, to protect human rights, and to reduce corruption. Mr. President, you and your government have not let us down. Plan Colombia enjoys wide bipartisan support in my country, and next year I will ask our Congress to renew its support so that this courageous nation can win its war against narco-terrorists".[60]
Uribe during a visit of US president George W. Bush to Colombia
The Uribe administration has maintained generally positive diplomatic relations with Spain and most Latin American nations. It signed several accords, including one in 2004 for the joint construction of a pipeline with Venezuela, a security and anti-drug trafficking cooperation deal with Paraguay in 2005, a commercial and technological cooperation agreement with Bolivia in 2004,[61] a defense agreement with Spain (which was modified in 2004 but still remained valid),[62] and economic and cultural agreements with the People's Republic of China in April 2005.[63]
Several analysts consider that, being an ally of the US, Uribe would be ideologically opposed to left-wing governments in Latin America and elsewhere. Yet, Uribe has participated in multilateral meetings and has held bilateral summits with presidents Hugo Chávez, Martín Torrijos, Lula da Silva, Ricardo Lagos, and Carlos Mesa, among others. Colombia has also maintained diplomatic relations with Cuba and the People's Republic of China.
There have been some diplomatic incidents and crises with Venezuela during his term, in particular around the 2005 Rodrigo Granda affair, Colombia's frustrated 2004 acquisition of 46 AMX-30 tanks from Spain, and an Alleged planned Venezuelan coup in 2004 by Colombian paramilitaries. These internationally worrying circumstances have been ultimately resolved through the use of official diplomatic channels and bilateral presidential summits (in the first two cases).
Uribe and US president Barack Obama
International law enforcement cooperation has been maintained with countries such as the US, Spain, the United Kingdom, Mexico, Ecuador, Venezuela, Peru, Panama, Paraguay, Honduras and Brazil among others.
Uribe's government, along with Peru and Ecuador, negotiated and (with Peru) signed a free trade agreement with the US. On 30 December 2005, Uribe signed a free trade agreement (FTA) with Mercosur and gives Colombian products preferential access to the market of 230 million people. Trade negotiations have also been underway with Mexico, Chile, the Andean community and the USA over its current proposal.
After the 2009 Honduran election Uribe joined a list of leaders that are supporting the next government following the coup d'état. "Colombia recognizes the next government", Uribe told reporters during an Ibero-American summit in Portugal on 30 November 2009. "A democratic process has taken place in Honduras with high participation, without fraud".[64]
In 2009, bilateral negotiations between the United States and Colombia which would give U.S. forces increased access to several Colombian military bases for the stated purpose of fighting terrorism and the drug trade generated controversy throughout the region. Venezuela's Hugo Chávez criticized the proposed deal as the creation of a purported "imperialist beachhead" while Colombian diplomats defended the agreement. U.S. Secretary of State Hillary Clinton stated that "there was no intention to expand the number of permanent [U.S.] personnel [in Colombia] beyond the maximum permitted by Congress". Other Latin American nations, including Brazil, also expressed their own concerns about the matter.[65][66][67]
On 2 July 2008 a covert rescue operation codenamed Operation Jaque by the Colombian Special Forces disguised as FARC guerrillas resulted in the rescue of Senator and former presidential candidate Ingrid Betancourt, the Americans Marc Gonsalves, Thomas Howes, and Keith Stansell and eleven soldiers and police officers. It was done without bloodshed and led to the capture of two guerrilla leaders. The operation heightened Uribe's already soaring popularity.  Uribe stated that the rescue operation "was guided in every way by the light of the Holy Spirit, the protection of our Lord and the Virgin Mary".[68] The hostages agreed, indicating that they had spent much time in captivity praying the rosary, and Ms. Betancourt, formerly a lapsed Catholic who prayed daily on a wooden rosary which she made while a hostage,[69] attributed the rescue as follows: "I am convinced this is a miracle of the Virgin Mary. To me it is clear she has had a hand in all of this".[68]
See also: Humanitarian exchange
Uribe during the 36th G8 summit
Despite significant political differences, until 2007 Colombia and Venezuela had only one major impasse in their relations, the Rodrigo Granda affair, which had been overcome thanks to the direct talks between Uribe and Chávez. Uribe's main political problem during 2007 was his handling of the humanitarian exchange situation: the FARC guerrillas held over 700 hostages, living in poor conditions in the Colombian jungle. These hostages included presidential candidate and French citizen Ingrid Betancourt (later freed), three American citizens (later freed), and several Colombian politicians and law enforcers. Some of the captives had been in the jungle for over 10 years. For the release of 40 of these hostages (the so-called "canjeables" or "exchangeables") the FARC demands a Demilitarized Zone that includes the towns of Florida and Pradera. The government has refused to comply with this demand, deciding instead to push for a military rescue of the hostages, or by searching the mediation of third parties like Switzerland and the Catholic Church. As all of those plans failed to get any positive outcome, Uribe appointed Senator Piedad Córdoba to mediate between the government and the guerrillas in an attempt to secure the liberation of the hostages. Córdoba then asked Chávez to mediate as well, with Uribe's consent. French president Nicolas Sarkozy was also willing to help in the mediation effort.
On 8 November 2007 Chávez met with alias "Iván Márquez" one of the highest members of the FARC and some other members of its secretariat at the Palacio de Miraflores in a widely publicized event. After the event Chavez promised to deliver evidence that some of the hostages remained alive. When Chávez met with Sarkozy on 19 November, Chávez was still waiting for the evidence. Lacking the "proof of life" that was promised to the families of the hostages, and seeing prominent FARC members using the media attention to promote their own ideology, Uribe became disgruntled with the mediation process.
On 22 November Uribe abruptly ended the mediation after Chávez spoke with the high command of the Colombian military during a call made by Córdoba.[citation needed] Uribe had warned Chávez against any attempt to talk to military high command. Chávez initially accepted the decision, but tensions escalated as the presidents increasingly attacked each other verbally, with Chávez claiming that Uribe and the U.S. simply preferred the war continue, and Uribe implying Chávez supported the rebels. Chávez announced a "freeze" of political relations and called Uribe a "pawn of the empire" and cut contact with the Colombian government, including rejecting calls from the Colombian embassy in Caracas. He announced his intent to sharply reduce bilateral commerce.[70] Chávez continued negotiating with the rebels and eventually secured the unilateral release of two, then four more, hostages to Venezuela which were meant as signs of good faith and preceded calls for more negotiations, which Uribe dismissed.
Main article: 2008 Andean diplomatic crisis
Uribe along with other Latin American leaders during the 21st Rio Group summit
A regional crisis began after Colombian troops killed FARC commander Raúl Reyes in a guerrilla camp inside Ecuadorian borders on 1 March. Ecuador, Venezuela and Nicaragua, which has a maritime dispute with Colombia, cut diplomatic ties with Colombia as a response, with Chavez and Ecuadorean President Rafael Correa ordering troops to their respective borders with Colombia.[71] Uribe in response placed the armed forces on high alert but did not move his troops to confront them even though the Colombian army is larger than Ecuador's and Venezuela's combined.[72] Several countries in the Americas criticized the incursion into Ecuador as a violation of national sovereignty,[73] which was also denounced by an OAS resolution.[citation needed] The United States backed Colombia's position and internal support for the action remained strong, Uribe's popularity rising as a result.[74] The impasse was finally solved when Leonel Fernández, President of the Dominican Republic, hosted an emergency summit of Latin American nations in Santo Domingo. He got Uribe, Correa, and Chavez to shake hands. Nicaragua's Daniel Ortega also announced the restoration of relations with Colombia at which Uribe told him that he would send him the bill for the plane fare for his ambassador.[75][76] In early March 2010, Judge Eloy Velasco of Spain brought forth allegations against Hugo Chávez, the FARC and ETA of conspiring to assassinate Uribe, along with other Colombian political figures.[77]
Socio-economic policy[edit]
The Uribe administration continuously dealt with the International Monetary Fund (IMF) and the World Bank, securing loans, agreeing to cut expenses, continue debt payments, privatize public companies, and foment investor confidence to comply with financial orthodoxy.[78]
Uribe at the INNOVA awards 2006, created to reward business innovation in Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises
Companies such as Carbocol, Telecom Colombia, Bancafé, Minercol, and others, which were either already in crisis or considered by the government as overly expensive to maintain under their current spending conditions, were among those restructured or privatized.
Most direct critics have considered Uribe's administration a key example of a government favoring free-market economic policies. Despite his attempt to open up the Colombian economy to compete better on the global stage critics argued that it has not addressed the root causes of poverty and unemployment. Since continued application of traditional trade and tax policies tend to benefit private and foreign investors over small owners and workers. Unions and labor groups claim that many privatizations and liquidations were done to please the IMF, the World Bank, and multinational companies, and hurt various national industries in the long run.[79]
Colombia's debt gradually increased yearly; while it stood at 52% of GDP in 2003, it reached 72% in 2010.[80] Unemployment remained at a high level (between 11 and 12%) under Uribe's administration.[81]
Referendum for reelection[edit]
A national referendum was promoted during Uribe's campaign and later modified by Congress and judicial review. The ability to revoke Congress was removed, as was the option to vote "Yes" or "No" as a whole. The modified proposal was defeated at the polls on 25 October 2003, and several left-wing candidates opposed to the referendum were victorious at regional elections the following day. At least 25% of the electorate needed to vote on each of the 15 proposals in order it to be accepted, but overall participation was only 24.8% and only the first proposal ("political death for the corrupt") achieved this. All 15 proposals were approved by a substantial majority of those who voted.[82][83]
Analysts considered these events a political setback for Uribe, as one of his main campaign propositions had failed, despite his personal leadership. The "active abstention" and blank voting campaigns that his opponents, in particular the Independent Democratic Pole and the Colombian Liberal Party, had promoted were allegedly successful in convincing enough of their sympathizers to stay home and instead participate in the next day's round of elections.
A number of Uribe's own supporters did not participate, as they found the referendum, which had been modified by Congress and later by the Judicial branch, to be too complex, long and uninspiring. Some also pointed out that extraordinary electoral initiatives (that is, those voted outside standard electoral dates) have traditionally suffered complications in Colombia, including a lack of participation.
In September 2003, Uribe issued a speech that contained allegations against what he called "agents of terrorism" inside a minority of human rights organizations, while at the same time declaring that he respected criticism from most other established organizations and sources. Similar statements were later repeated in other instances.[84] These statements were sharply criticized inside and outside Colombia because they could endanger the work of human rights and opposition figures.[85]
Contacts begun in 2002 with the paramilitary AUC forces and their leader Carlos Castaño, which had publicly expressed their will to declare a cease-fire, continued in 2003 amid a degree of national and international controversy.
Reelection proposal[edit]
In 2004, Uribe successfully sought a Congressional amendment to the Colombian Constitution of 1991 which allowed him to run for a second term as president. For years, Colombian presidents had been limited to a single four-year term and had been barred from any sort of reelection, even if nonconsecutive. Uribe originally had expressed his disagreement with consecutive reelection during his campaign, but later changed his mind, first at a private level and later in public appearances.
Many analysts considered that, to secure the approval of this reform, Uribe may have slacked on his campaign promises, because of what has been perceived as his indirect bribing of congressmen, through the alleged assignment of their relatives to the diplomatic corps and through promises of investment in their regions of origin. Uribe's supporters consider that no actual bribing took place, and that a consensus among the diverse sectors that back Uribe's policies in Congress had to be reached through political negotiation.
The amendment permitting a single reelection was approved by Congress in December 2004, and by the Constitutional Court in October 2005.[86]
2006 presidential elections[edit]
Main article: 2006 Colombian presidential election
In 2004, Uribe's political supporters amended the constitution to allow him to run for a second term, previously proscribed by the Colombian constitution, and his own decision to run for a second term was announced in late 2005.[87] With this amendment, Uribe was re-elected on 28 May 2006 for a second presidential term (2006–2010), and became the first president to be consecutively re-elected in Colombia in over a century. He received about 62% of the vote, winning over 7.3 million votes.[88] This was the largest  victory for a presidential candidate in Colombian history.
The Organization of American States (OAS) deployed electoral observers in 12 departments: Antioquia, Risaralda, Quindío, Atlántico, Bolívar, Santander, Córdoba, Cauca, César, Nariño, Magdalena and Valle. In a statement made on 28 May, OAS mentioned that the elections "have taken place in an atmosphere of freedom, transparency and normalcy", despite incidents "related to the use of indelible ink, voter substitution and the accreditation of electoral witnesses, though these have no effect on the electoral process as a whole" and "developments in northern Santander province that took the lives of army personnel and left others injured in an ambush carried out by subversive groups".[89]
Bribery investigation[edit]
Main article: Yidispolitics scandal
In April 2008, Yidis Medina, a former congresswoman from the pro-government Colombian Conservative Party, claimed that members of Uribe's administration had offered her to appoint local officials in her home province, in exchange for voting in favor of the 2004 reelection bill. According to Medina, the government had not fulfilled that promise, prompting her declaration. The Attorney General of Colombia ordered her arrest, after which she turned herself over to authorities and testified to the Supreme Court as part of the investigation.  The opposition Alternative Democratic Pole party asked for Uribe to be investigated for bribery.[90] After the declarations made by Medina, the Supreme Court of Colombia sent copies of the process to other judicial authorities, who have the jurisdiction to investigate several former and current cabinet members and other high officials. The Accusations Commission of the Colombian Congress will study the matter and decide if there are enough merits to officially investigate Uribe.[91][92]
Popularity[edit]
Since his 2002 election Uribe's approval ratings had remained high, usually staying between 60 and 70 percent after eight years in office, but this status has radically changed.[93][94][95][96]
During early 2008, Uribe's approval rating hit 81%, one of the highest popularity levels of his entire presidency.[97] In June 2008, after Operation Jaque, Uribe's approval rate rose to an unprecedented 91%.[98] In May 2009 his popularity had dropped to 68%.[99]
According to a June 2009 Ipsos-Napoleón Franco national poll for the 2010 presidential campaign, covering over thirty cities and municipalities, Uribe's overall approval rating was 76% but only 57% would vote in favor of his potential reelection for a third term.[100][101]
During the eight years of Uribe's government, internal polling, communications strategy and government and presidential image were managed by Uribe's Communications Advisors Jaime Bermudez, who later became Ambassador to Argentina and then Foreign Affairs Minister; Jorge Mario Eastman, who was Vice-minister of Defense before and left to become Vice-minister of Defense again; and Mauricio Carradini who served under Uribe until the end the period in office.[102]
Uribe's popularity on leaving office was measured to be between 79% and 84% depending on the source consulted.[citation needed] However, those opinion polls in Colombia were mostly carried out among the inhabitants of big cities and did not include the opinion of rural populations, most affected by war and poverty.[citation needed] Some journalists were also surprised that the president's popularity is not reflected in the elections, where the abstention varies between 50% and 80% of the electorate.[103]
In 2019, 69% of the population surveyed said they had an unfavourable image of Uribe, while 26% said they had a favourable image.[96]
2010 third term proposal[edit]
As the end of Uribe's second term approached, his followers sought a new amendment that would grant him the right to run for a third term.[104][105]
In May 2009, Defense Minister Juan Manuel Santos resigned so he could run for president in case Uribe either did not or could not run again.  Santos said before resigning that he did not want to run against Uribe.[104]
Congress backed a proposed referendum on the matter, but the Constitutional Court rejected it after reviewing the resulting law. On 26 February 2010 lead justice Mauricio Gonzalez publicly announced the Court's decision.  Gonzalez said that the Court had found numerous irregularities in the way signatures were obtained to allow the referendum to pass.[106] He also said that the law calling for a referendum contained "substantial violations to the democratic principle" that made it unconstitutional. Uribe stated that he would respect the decision but called for voters to continue supporting his administration's policies in the upcoming elections.[107]
The Constitutional Court not only threw out the referendum, but declared Colombian presidents could only serve two terms, even if they were nonconsecutive.  This effectively foreclosed a potential Uribe run for president in 2014.[108] The Constitution has since been amended to limit the president to a single four-year term, restoring the status quo that prevailed before 2005.
Post-presidency[edit]
Former Colombian President Alvaro Uribe with his students from Georgetown University in Washington, D.C.
In late 2010, a few months after leaving office, Uribe was named visiting scholar at Georgetown University's Walsh School of Foreign Service,[109] where he taught students in different disciplines as a guest lecturer in seminars and classes. In 2011, Uribe was granted an honorary award by the Latin American Student Association of Georgetown, for his leadership and commitment with the Latin American community of the university.
Uribe's appointment at Georgetown sparked controversy. In September, more than 150 scholars, including 10 Georgetown professors and leading experts on Latin America and Colombia, signed a letter calling for Uribe's firing.[110] A Colombian humorist suggested Uribe teach a course on wiretapping, which his administration illegally conducted on opposition figures, human rights workers, journalists and Supreme Court justices.[111] Many students protested, with some hanging banners calling him a "mass murderer" for the deaths of thousands of civilians that the army was accused of later dressing up as guerrillas.[111]
In November 2010, while at the Georgetown campus, Uribe was served a criminal subpoena in the case Claudia Balcero Giraldo v. Drummond, regarding hundreds of civilians murdered by paramilitary forces loyal to Uribe.[112] After a year at Georgetown, Uribe left to continue with his personal endeavors in Colombia. In October 2012, News Corporation welcomed Uribe to the board of directors upon the retirement of Andrew Knight, John Thornton, and Arthur Siskind.[113] In 2012, Uribe joined the Leadership Council of Concordia, a nonprofit organization in New York City that creates public-private partnerships.[citation needed] Prosecutors accuse Uribe of helping to plan paramilitary massacres in La Granja (1996), San Roque (1996) and El Aro (1997) while he was governor of Antioquia, and the February 1998 assassination of Jesús María Valle, an attorney and human rights defender working with victims in those cases.[114]
Senator of Colombia (2014–2020)[edit]
Uribe, who had served in the Senate prior to his election as president, is the only former Colombian head of state in history to have become a Senator after occupying the presidency.[115]
Founded by the former president, the Democratic Center (Centro Democrático) party managed to win 20 seats in the Senate during 9 March congressional election, the second highest number after the 21 seats held by President Juan Manuel Santos U Party (Partido de la U). Uribe's new Democratic Center party also won 19 of the House of Representatives' 166 seats.[115][116]
Uribe campaigned actively against the peace deal between the Juan Manuel Santos administration and FARC.[117] He argued the deal would undermine the constitution by appointing FARC leaders, who received no prison terms for their crimes, to congress.
Home detention[edit]
In August 2020, Uribe was placed under house arrest at his hacienda "El Ubérrimo" by the Supreme Court of Justice of Colombia, as part of ongoing judicial invenstigations into El Aro and La Granja massacres, which took place while he was Governor of Antioquia.[1][2][118] Uribe's detention marked the first time in Colombian history that a court had detained a former president.[119] The day following his arrest, Uribe tested positive for COVID-19, but he announced he was cured six days later.[120] On 18 August 2020, Uribe resigned his seat in the Senate of Colombia.[119][121] Uribe was later released on 10 October 2020, after the Supreme Court ruled that there was a lack of evidence to suggest he engaged in witness tampering.[122]
Another court case called "Caso Uribe" was also levied against Uribe. It was a dispute in which Uribe began as a victim ended as a victimizer, according to the status granted by the high court to his counterpart in this process, Senator Iván Cepeda.[123]
The process passed into the hands of the Office of the Colombian Attorney General, thus evading the jurisdiction that the Supreme Court of Justice had over it.[124] The prosecutor delegated to this high court, Gabriel Jaimes Durán, requested the preclusion of the process, ruling in a four-month investigation on the probative material that the court compiled over the course of three years.[125]
In May 2024, Uribe was formally charged with witness tampering and bribery in the Caso Uribe, following the release of wiretapped phone conversations in which he was heard discussing efforts to reverse two former paramilitaries who were set to testify against him with one of his lawyers.[126] A court in Bogotá found him in July 2025 guilty of witness tampering and a fraud charge[127] and sentenced him in August to 12 years' home confinement.[128] As part of an appeal, he was ordered released by the Superior Tribunal on 19 August pending a final decision on his conviction.[129] On 21 October 2025, a court overturned Uribe's bribery conviction.[130]
"False positives" scandal[edit]
Main article: "False positives" scandal
In 2008, the "false positives" extrajudicial executions scandal came to light. Several Army brigades had implemented a policy where commanders and soldiers who reported combat casualties were rewarded, while those who didn't report results faced disciplinary action and punishment. This policy didn't reward the military for capturing guerrillas, but rather for reporting body counts in combat. It later emerged that several National Army units were executing civilians, particularly those from impoverished backgrounds, and passing them off as combat casualties to artificially increase death tolls, in an effort to demonstrate the success of democratic security policy of Uribe's government, a security strategy focused on combating guerrilla groups. The killings were systematically carried out by various National Army units that would recruit young people under the pretense of offering them jobs, before killing them in remote areas and staging the scenes to look like combat.[131][132]
In December 2019, the Special Jurisdiction for Peace discovered the first mass grave of false positives in the municipality of Dabeiba, Antioquia, where 50 civilians were found buried and had been presented as guerrillas killed by National Army units during the Uribe government between 2006 and 2008. It was found that the graves were dug by soldiers from the Fourth Brigade of Medellín, located less than three hours away by car from Dabeiba. It is estimated that across the country there are between 3,500 and 10,000 victims of false positives in what Human Rights Watch has described as an unprecedented case of human rights violations, where the army killed its own civilians to pass them off as enemies killed in combat.[133][134]
The scandal led to the resignation of the National Army Commander at the time, General Mario Montoya Uribe, who later came under the jurisdiction of the Special Jurisdiction for Peace after requesting to be tried by this body as part of Colombia's transitional justice process.[135] In August 2023, the Special Jurisdiction for Peace formally charged Mario Montoya and eight other military officers for war crimes and crimes against humanity connected to at least 130 extrajudicial executions in the eastern Antioquia region.[135] The Special Jurisdiction for Peace issued its first adversarial trial linked to these extrajudicial killings in September 2024.[136] In September 2025, twelve former soldiers were sentenced by the Special Jurisdiction for Peace to five to eight year restorative sanctions for their role in 135 "false positives" killings committed between 2002 and 2005.[137]
Political endorsement[edit]
In the 2026 Colombian presidential election, following the defeat of his party's candidate, Paloma Valencia, in the first round,[138] Uribe officially endorsed candidate Abelardo de la Espriella for the runoff.[139] Uribe campaigned for De la Espriella, framing the second-round vote against left-wing candidate Iván Cepeda as a crucial defense of the Constitution and democratic liberties. Following De la Espriella's victory on June 21, 2026, Uribe congratulated the president-elect.[140]
Awards[edit]
Coat of arms of Uribe as Knight of the Collar of the Order of Isabella the Catholic
National awards[edit]
1990: Star senator, by the Senate of the Republic.[141]
1992: Senator with the best initiatives, by the Senate of the Republic.[141]
1993: Best senator, by the Senate of the Republic.[141]
2013: El Gran Colombiano ("The Great Colombian"), through a poll conducted by History Channel.[142]
2015: Best senator, by the Senate of the Republic.[143]
Uribe being presented with the Presidential Medal of Freedom by President George W. Bush
Foreign awards[edit]
 Peru:
 Grand Cross of the Order of the Sun of Peru – (2004).[144]
 Spain:
 Knight of the Collar of the Order of Isabella the Catholic – (2005).[145]
 United States:
 Presidential Medal of Freedom – (2009).[146]
 Uruguay:
 Medal of the Oriental Republic of Uruguay – (2003).[147]
Other awards[edit]
In 2007, the American Jewish Committee (AJC) gave Uribe its "Light unto the nations" award. AJC President E. Robert Goodkind, who presented the award at AJC's Annual Dinner held at the National Building Museum in Washington, D.C., stated: "President Uribe is a staunch ally of the United States, a good friend of Israel and the Jewish people, and is a firm believer in human dignity and human development in Colombia and the Americas".[148]
In January 2009 US President George W. Bush awarded Uribe, along with former Prime Minister of the United Kingdom Tony Blair and former Prime Minister of Australia John Howard, the highest civilian award; Presidential Medal of Freedom. Dana Perino, the White House Press Secretary explained that he received this award "for [his] work to improve the lives of [his] citizens and for [his] efforts to promote democracy, human rights and peace abroad". She said (speaking of the three leaders who received the reward on this day): "All three leaders have been staunch allies of the United States, particularly in combating terrorism".
In November 2009 Nicolas De Santis, President of Gold Mercury International, presented Uribe with the Gold Mercury International Award for Peace and Security in a ceremony at the House of Nariño in Bogotá.[149] The Award recognized Uribe's efforts to transform Colombia's internal security mechanisms, improve human rights, social cohesion and general development of the country.[150]
See also[edit]
2010 Colombia-Venezuela diplomatic crisis
Colombian Armed Conflict
Colombian parapolitics scandal
Democratic security
"False positives" scandal
List of heads of the executive by approval rating
List of presidents of Colombia
Plan Colombia
Yidispolitics scandal
References[edit]

1 2 3 Joe, Parkin Daniels (4 August 2020). "Colombia: court orders detention of ex-president Uribe amid fraud investigation". the Guardian. Archived from the original on 4 August 2020. Retrieved 16 November 2025.
1 2 3 Emma, Newbery (4 August 2020). "House arrest for ex-president Álvaro Uribe Vélez". The Bogotá Post. Archived from the original on 10 August 2020. Retrieved 16 November 2025.
↑ "ONU denuncia patrón de ejecuciones extrajudiciales e impunidad en Colombia" [UN denounces pattern of extrajudicial executions and impunity in Colombia]. Cronica del Quindio (in European Spanish). Archived from the original on 13 August 2017. Retrieved 5 February 2026.
↑ "Israel 'to assist' flotilla inquiry". Al Jazeera English. Archived from the original on 19 February 2011. Retrieved 16 November 2025.
↑ Kevin, Howlett (10 October 2012). "Álvaro Uribe Vélez, a political biography". Colombia Politics. Archived from the original on 21 September 2013. Retrieved 16 November 2025.
↑ Lafuente, Javier (22 November 2016). "Uribe rechaza el nuevo acuerdo de paz entre el Gobierno y las FARC y pide un nuevo plebiscito" [Uribe rejects the new peace agreement between the Government and the FARC and calls for a new plebiscite]. EL PAÍS (in Spanish). Archived from the original on 13 July 2018. Retrieved 7 February 2026.
↑ Casa Editorial El Tiempo (23 August 2020). "Esta es la indagación de Corte a Álvaro Uribe por la masacre de El Aro" [This is the Court's investigation of Álvaro Uribe for the El Aro massacre]. El Tiempo (in Spanish). Archived from the original on 24 August 2020. Retrieved 7 February 2026.
↑ "La denuncia pone en evidencia el 'modus operandi' de Álvaro Uribe: exfiscal Montealegre" [The complaint exposes the 'modus operandi' of Álvaro Uribe: former prosecutor Montealegre]. EL ESPECTADOR (in Spanish). Archived from the original on 2 September 2020. Retrieved 4 September 2020.
↑ Armario, Christine (31 August 2020). "US cables: Colombia's ex-president suspected of militia ties". The Washington Post. ISSN 0190-8286. Archived from the original on 1 June 2021. Retrieved 5 February 2026.
↑ Gamboa, Laura; Schwartz, Rachel A. (2026). New Forms of Democratic Erosion in Latin America. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-1-009-86248-6.
↑ Casa Editorial El Tiempo (11 August 2002). "ALVARO URIBE VÉLEZ". El Tiempo (in Spanish). Archived from the original on 2 October 2020. Retrieved 16 November 2025.
↑ Colombia, laboratorio de embrujos. Democracia y terrorismo, 2007, Hernando Calvo Ospina
↑ "Blasts mar Colombia inauguration". 7 August 2002. Retrieved 5 February 2026.
↑ "Un voto en respaldo de la mano dura contra la guerrilla" [A vote in support of the iron fist against the guerrilla]. www.clarin.com (in Spanish). Archived from the original on 26 May 2008. Retrieved 16 November 2025.
↑ "El hombre que protegió a Álvaro Uribe ante señalamiento de nexos con la mafia en 1982" [The man who protected Álvaro Uribe against accusations of ties with the mafia in 1982]. El Espectador (in Spanish). 12 April 2020.
↑ "Álvaro Uribe salió de alcaldía de Medellín por nexos con narcos, plantea libro" [Álvaro Uribe left the Medellín mayor's office due to ties with drug traffickers, book suggests]. Blu Radio (in Spanish). 1 April 2013.
↑ "H.E. Álvaro Uribe Velez". United Nations. Archived from the original on 30 April 2009. Retrieved 8 August 2012.
↑ "Álvaro Uribe Vélez. Señor Presidente de la República de Colombia" [Álvaro Uribe Vélez. Mr. President of the Republic of Colombia]. Web.presidencia.gov.co. Archived from the original on 17 May 2012. Retrieved 8 August 2012.
↑ López Suárez, Alfonso (2001). "Uribe, primero la autoridad" [Uribe, authority first]. El Colombiano (Series). Archived from the original on 18 April 2008. Retrieved 4 July 2008. En 1998, una vez dejó la gobernación, viajó a Londres, donde gracias a la beca Simón Bolívar del Consejo Británico fue nombrado Senior Associate Member de Saint Antony's College en la Universidad de Oxford.
↑ "Lina Moreno dijo que sus hijos no son culpables de lo que les acusan" [Lina Moreno said her children are not guilty of what they are accused of]. El Espectador. 4 August 2010. Retrieved 17 June 2023.
1 2 3 4 5 "::Presidencia de la República de Colombia::" [::Presidency of the Republic of Colombia::]. web.presidencia.gov.co. Archived from the original on 19 December 2009. Retrieved 16 November 2025.
↑ Casa Editorial El Tiempo (26 February 2005). "ASESINADO FERNANDO URIBE". El Tiempo (in Spanish). Archived from the original on 9 January 2021. Retrieved 16 November 2025.
↑ Espectador, El (12 April 2020). "El hombre que protegió a Álvaro Uribe ante señalamiento de nexos con la mafia en 1982" [The man who protected Álvaro Uribe against allegations of ties to the mafia in 1982]. ELESPECTADOR.COM (in Spanish). Archived from the original on 14 February 2021. Retrieved 16 November 2025.
1 2 United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees. "War Without Quarter: Colombia and International Humanitarian Law". UNHCR. Archived from the original on 17 September 2016. Retrieved 16 November 2025.
↑ "Tercer Informe sobre la Situación de los Derechos Humanos en Colombia. Capítulo IV continuado 5" [Third Report on the Situation of Human Rights in Colombia. Chapter IV continued 5] (in Spanish). Inter-American Commission on Human Rights. Archived from the original on 9 June 2011. Retrieved 3 June 2010.
↑ "Americas". www.hrw.org. Archived from the original on 12 November 2008. Retrieved 16 November 2025.
↑ United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees. "UNHCR. Refworld. Human Rights Watch". UNHCR. Archived from the original on 24 December 2016. Retrieved 16 November 2025.
↑ "Mancuso dice que paramilitares apoyaron campañas presidenciales de Uribe y Andrés Pastrana" [Mancuso says paramilitaries supported presidential campaigns of Uribe and Andrés Pastrana]. SWI swissinfo.ch (in Spanish). 15 May 2023. Retrieved 12 January 2024.
↑ "Terrorist Organization Profile - START - National Consortium for the Study of Terrorism and Responses to Terrorism". www.start.umd.edu. Archived from the original on 27 July 2013. Retrieved 16 November 2025.
↑ "Centro de Noticias del Estado - Presidencia de la República". www.presidencia.gov.co. Archived from the original on 29 September 2007. Retrieved 16 November 2025.
↑ "Uribe defends security policies". 18 November 2004. Retrieved 5 February 2026.
1 2 3 "Colombia - Democratic Security & Defense Policy". www.colombiaemb.org. Archived from the original on 17 October 2007. Retrieved 16 November 2025.
↑ Luis, Alberto Moreno (19 August 2004). "After a dark period, a better Colombia". www.boston.com. Archived from the original on 4 March 2016. Retrieved 5 February 2026.
↑ "World Report 2005: Colombia". Archived from the original on 27 July 2020. Retrieved 16 November 2025.
↑ "Report of the High Commissioner for Human Rights on the situation of human rights in Colombia" (PDF). www.hchr.org.co. Archived from the original (PDF) on 19 April 2007. Retrieved 16 November 2025.
↑ "Corte Constitucional declara inexequible Acto Legislativo de Estatuto Antiterrorista". 28 September 2007. Archived from the original on 28 September 2007.
↑ "Las 'Águilas negras', grupo conformado por desmovilizados de las autodefensas, ya azotan 5 regiones" [The 'Black Eagles', a group made up of demobilized members of the self-defense forces, are already scourging 5 regions]. El Tiempo. 31 October 2006. p. 1. Archived from the original on 12 March 2007. Retrieved 20 August 2007.
↑ "Ley de Justicia y Paz" [Justice and Peace Law] (PDF). Congress of the Republic of Colombia. Archived from the original (PDF) on 21 July 2011. Retrieved 16 November 2025.
↑ Catherine, Gouëset (26 June 2015). "Colombie: des milliers de civils tués pour simuler des succès militaires" [Colombia: thousands of civilians killed to simulate military success]. LExpress.fr (in French). Archived from the original on 29 June 2017. Retrieved 16 November 2025.
↑ "L'ONU dénonce un taux d'impunité de 98,5% des forces armées en Colombie" [The UN denounces a 98.5% impunity rate for the armed forces in Colombia]. archives.varmatin.com (in French). Archived from the original on 8 August 2017. Retrieved 16 November 2025.
↑ "Aparece en Colombia una fosa común con 2.000 cadáveres" [A mass grave with 2,000 bodies appears in Colombia] (in European Spanish). Archived from the original on 5 March 2017. Retrieved 16 November 2025.
↑ "UN warns about forced disappearances in Colombia". EDIEC. Archived from the original on 16 March 2012. Retrieved 8 August 2012.
↑ "COLOMBIA: Who Cares About the Victims of Forced Displacement?". IPS ipsnews.net. Archived from the original on 21 September 2010. Retrieved 14 March 2011.
↑ Paula, López (3 March 2009). "Ecuador, lleno de desplazados colombianos" [Ecuador, full of displaced Colombians]. El Colombiano.com (in Spanish). Archived from the original on 10 July 2011. Retrieved 16 November 2025.
↑ Internal Displacement Monitoring Centre (IDMC) – Norwegian Refugee Council. "IDMC | Internally Displaced People (IDPs) in Colombia". Internal-displacement.org. Archived from the original on 22 July 2012. Retrieved 8 August 2012.
↑ Brodzinsky, Sibylla (29 November 2006). "Colombian establishment rocked by death squad scandal". The Guardian. p. 1. ISSN 0261-3077. Archived from the original on 1 June 2021. Retrieved 5 February 2026.
↑ Vieira, Constanza (17 November 2006). "Colombia – Arrests of Lawmakers with Paramilitary Ties Rock Government". Inter Press Service News. p. 1. Archived from the original on 2 April 2012. Retrieved 8 February 2016.
↑ Begg, Kristen (3 December 2009). "Ex governor jailed for 40 years for parapolitics". Colombia Reports. p. 1. Archived from the original on 10 March 2012. Retrieved 4 December 2009.
1 2 "La fibra intima" [The intimate fiber]. Revista Semana. 22 April 2006. p. 1. Archived from the original on 5 June 2009. Retrieved 10 December 2018.
↑ "Uribe se defiende". Revista Semana. 22 April 2006. p. 1. Archived from the original on 7 June 2009. Retrieved 10 December 2018.
↑ Forero, Juan (23 April 2008). "Cousin of Colombian President Arrested in Death Squad Probe". The Washington Post. p. 1. Archived from the original on 4 November 2012. Retrieved 23 April 2010.
↑ "Colombia high court sentences Uribe kin for militia ties". Fox News. 22 February 2011. Archived from the original on 23 February 2011. Retrieved 26 February 2011.
↑ "Colombia's Uribe under probe over 1997 massacre". Agence France-Presse. 23 April 2008. p. 1. Archived from the original on 14 June 2012.
↑ "Uribe: Yo no me reuní con paramilitares" [Uribe: I did not meet with paramilitaries]. Revista Semana. 23 April 2008. p. 1. Archived from the original on 30 April 2008. Retrieved 10 December 2018.
1 2 3 4 5 6 Forero, Juan (17 May 2009). "Scandals Surround Colombian President Uribe". www.washingtonpost.com. Archived from the original on 28 January 2011. Retrieved 16 November 2025.
↑ Adriaan, Alsema (23 February 2009). "Uribe denies having ordered DAS wiretaps". Colombia news | Colombia Reports. Archived from the original on 10 March 2012. Retrieved 16 November 2025.
1 2 "El DAS sigue grabando, Articulo OnLine" [The DAS continues recording, Online Article]. www.semana.com. Archived from the original on 21 April 2010. Retrieved 16 November 2025.
↑ Gonzalo Guillen (2 October 2009). "Rosales niega plan para asesinar a Chávez – Venezuela" [Rosales denies plan to assassinate Chávez – Venezuela]. El Nuevo Herald. Archived from the original on 9 March 2012. Retrieved 8 August 2012.
↑ Hernandez, A. (21 January 2003). "Uribe pide a E.U. un despliegue militar en Colombia "similar" al de Irak" [Uribe asks the U.S. for a military deployment in Colombia "similar" to that in Iraq]. www.ania.urcm.net. Archived from the original on 28 September 2007. Retrieved 16 November 2025.
↑ "Bush, Uribe Applaud Strength of U.S.-Colombia Partnership - US Department of State". United States Department of State. Archived from the original on 24 August 2006. Retrieved 16 November 2025.
↑ "Acuerdan Colombia y Bolivia cooperación comercial". www.esmas.com. Archived from the original on 13 April 2013. Retrieved 16 November 2025.
↑ "España compromete con Colombia apoyo estratégico contra el terrorismo" [Spain pledges strategic support to Colombia against terrorism]. www.belt.es. Archived from the original on 6 April 2005. Retrieved 16 November 2025.
↑ "Firman China y Colombia 5 documentos de cooperación". Xinhua News Agency. Archived from the original on 17 March 2012. Retrieved 5 February 2026.
↑ "Honduras hopes to move past coup with election (Version 2)". AP via Yahoo News. 30 November 2009. Archived from the original on 1 December 2009. Retrieved 30 November 2009.
↑ "U.S. Military Base Plan Puts Colombia in Hot Water". Time. 12 August 2009. p. 1. Archived from the original on 1 July 2010. Retrieved 23 June 2010.
↑ Romero, Simon (22 July 2009). "Increased U.S. Military Presence in Colombia Could Pose Problems With Neighbors". The New York Times. p. 1. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on 8 July 2017. Retrieved 7 February 2026.
↑ Carroll, Rory; MacAskill, Ewen (27 August 2009). "Outcry in South America over US military base pact". The Guardian. p. 1. ISSN 0261-3077. Archived from the original on 13 February 2017. Retrieved 7 February 2026.
1 2 "Rosary plays important role in hostage rescue in Colombia". Catholic News Agency. Retrieved 16 November 2025.
↑ "Betancourt to visit Lourdes shrine". africa.reuters.com. Archived from the original on 9 January 2009. Retrieved 16 November 2025.
↑ "Escaramuzas Vervales". Revista Semana. 26 January 2008. p. 1. Archived from the original on 29 January 2008. Retrieved 29 January 2008.
↑ "BBC NEWS | Americas | Neighbours cut ties with Colombia". news.bbc.co.uk. p. 1. Archived from the original on 9 March 2008. Retrieved 5 February 2026.
↑ O'Neill, Sean; Hamilton, Fiona (3 March 2008). "Hugo Chavez Moves His Tanks to Border as Regional War Looms". The Times. London. p. 1.[dead link]
↑ "Ecuador lobbies for support against Colombia". The Irish Times. p. 1. Archived from the original on 23 October 2012. Retrieved 5 February 2026.
↑ "Bush backs Colombian president". International Herald Tribune. Retrieved 6 February 2026.
↑ Antoine, Griezmann (15 February 2012). "27g". 27g.tech. Retrieved 6 February 2026.
↑ "Venezuela, Colombia make peace". msnbc.com. 7 March 2008. p. 1. Archived from the original on 14 February 2017. Retrieved 5 February 2026.
↑ "Graves acusaciones de nexos entre el Gobierno venezolano, las FARC Y ETA". www.noticias.com.co. Archived from the original on 22 April 2012. Retrieved 5 February 2026.
↑ "Gobierno Uribe Tiene un Impacto Favorable en la Reducción de la Pobreza" [The Uribe Government Has a Favorable Impact on Poverty Reduction]. noticias.presidencia.gov.co. Archived from the original on 29 September 2007. Retrieved 16 November 2025.
↑ "To the Spoilers the Victory: Colombia Privatises the Mineral Industry with World Bank Support". www.minesandcommunities.org. Archived from the original on 18 March 2008. Retrieved 6 February 2026.
↑ "Central government debt, total (% of GDP) – Colombia". World Bank Open Data. Archived from the original on 18 October 2025. Retrieved 5 February 2026.
↑ "Desempleo, total (% de la población activa total) (estimación modelado OIT) – Colombia | Data". datos.bancomundial.org. Archived from the original on 26 March 2020. Retrieved 26 March 2020.
↑ "IFES Election Guide - Election Profile for Colombia". www.electionguide.org. Archived from the original on 6 July 2007. Retrieved 5 February 2026.
↑ "Official Election Results". Archived from the original on 2 September 2004.
↑ "Speech by Álvaro Uribe". www.ciponline.org. Archived from the original on 3 March 2016. Retrieved 5 February 2026.
↑ "The Uribe government and NGOs". Center for International Policy. Archived from the original on 3 March 2016. Retrieved 5 February 2026.
↑ "Colombia re-election ban lifted". 20 October 2005. Retrieved 7 February 2026.
↑ "Uribe se lanza a la reelección". BBC News. 28 November 2005. Retrieved 5 February 2026.
↑ "Colombia's Uribe wins second term". BBC News. 29 May 2006. Retrieved 5 February 2026.
↑ "OAS Observation Mission: Colombian Elections Transparent, Normal". Organization of American States. Archived from the original on 13 November 2007. Retrieved 5 February 2026.
↑ Bronstein, Hugh. "Colombian opposition calls for Uribe bribery probe". U.S. Archived from the original on 2 October 2020. Retrieved 5 February 2026.
↑ "La Corte dice que Yidis Medina sí vendió su voto por reelección". EL TIEMPO. 8 May 2008. Retrieved 8 May 2008.[dead link]
↑ "Uribe officially investigated for bribery Medina". Colombia Reports. 8 May 2008. Retrieved 9 May 2008.[dead link]
↑ "Presidential Results Due in June". Inter Press Service. 31 May 2010. p. 1. Archived from the original on 13 June 2010. Retrieved 8 February 2016.
↑ "Another strong leader for Colombia". www.miamiherald.com. Retrieved 16 November 2025.
↑ "BBC NEWS | Americas | Profile: Alvaro Uribe Velez". news.bbc.co.uk. Archived from the original on 26 February 2008. Retrieved 7 February 2026.
1 2 "Álvaro Uribe alcanza cifra histórica de impopularidad". wradio.com.co. 17 December 2019. Archived from the original on 18 December 2019. Retrieved 20 December 2019.
↑ "Imagen favorable del presidente Uribe rompió récord del 80 por ciento". El Tiempo. 24 January 2008. p. 1.[permanent dead link]
↑ Bronstein, Hugh (6 July 2008). "Popularity of Colombia's Uribe soars after rescue". Reuters. Archived from the original on 1 October 2009. Retrieved 6 July 2008.
↑ "Si la votación del referendo reeleccionista fuera hoy, el presidente Uribe podría ser candidato". El Tiempo. Retrieved 16 November 2025.
↑ "Si no es Uribe, es Santos". Revista Semana. Archived from the original on 29 August 2009. Retrieved 31 October 2009.
↑ "La Gran Encuesta | La Silla Vacía - Noticias, historias, debate, blogs y multimedia sobre el poder en Colombia". www.lasillavacia.com (in Spanish). 2 June 2009. Archived from the original on 5 June 2009. Retrieved 16 November 2025.
↑ "Presidencia de la Republica". Archived from the original on 29 August 2013.
↑ "Rosalux – M. Lemoine – Colombie : paramilitaires et militaires aux trousses de la population". rosa-lux.fr. Archived from the original on 20 December 2016. Retrieved 14 September 2016.
1 2 The Economist, 10 January 2009 U.S. print edition, page 34. "Politics in Colombia: Third Term Temptation"
↑ "Arrancó en firme campaña por tercer período presidencial de Álvaro Uribe". El Tiempo. Retrieved 16 July 2021.
↑ Chris Kraul; Jenny Carolina González (27 February 2010). "Colombia court rules out any Uribe bid for third term". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on 17 October 2017. Retrieved 20 February 2020.
↑ "Colombian judges deny Alvaro Uribe third term poll", BBC, 27 February 2010
↑ Buckman, Robert T. (2010). The World Today Series: Latin America 2010. Harpers Ferry, West Virginia: Stryker-Post Publications. ISBN 978-1-935264-12-5.
↑ "Anthony Clark Arend » Former Colombian President, Alvaro Uribe, to teach at Georgetown University". anthonyclarkarend.com. Archived from the original on 11 August 2013. Retrieved 16 November 2025.
↑ Mike Giglio (13 October 2010). "Appointment of Colombian Ex-President Sparks Controversy at Georgetown". Newsweek. Archived from the original on 24 July 2018. Retrieved 24 July 2018.
1 2 "Colombia: The dark side of Alvaro Uribe". Public Radio International. 2 August 2016. Archived from the original on 24 July 2018. Retrieved 24 July 2018.
↑ "Clearing the Air About Uribe's Subpoena". 30 November 2010. Archived from the original on 26 March 2020. Retrieved 26 March 2020.
↑ "Chairman's Address to the 2012 Annual Meeting of Stockholders". 16 October 2012. Archived from the original on 19 October 2012. Retrieved 18 October 2012.
↑ Casey, Nicholas (8 July 2018). "In Colombian Death Ranch Case, Some Fear Prosecution Will Be Buried". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 5 August 2018. Retrieved 4 August 2018.
1 2 Bedoya, Nicolas (21 July 2014). "Uribe baptized into Colombia Senate, awaiting fire from opponents". Colombia News | Colombia Reports. colombiareports.co. Archived from the original on 26 November 2014. Retrieved 21 July 2014.
↑ Alsema, Adriaan (21 July 2014). "Santos inaugurates Colombia Congress, calls on lawmakers to support peace". Colombia News | Colombia Reports. colombiareports.co. Archived from the original on 8 August 2014. Retrieved 21 July 2014.
↑ Brodzinsky, Sibylla (7 October 2016). "Colombia's peace deal rejection returns Álvaro Uribe to political limelight". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 28 August 2017. Retrieved 28 August 2017.
↑ "Esta es la indagación de Corte a Álvaro Uribe por la masacre de El Aro" [This is the Court's investigation of Álvaro Uribe for the El Aro massacre]. El Tiempo (in Spanish). 23 August 2020. Archived from the original on 24 August 2020. Retrieved 25 August 2020.
1 2 "Colombian ex-President Uribe resigns Senate seat amid witness tampering probe". 18 August 2020. Archived from the original on 20 August 2020. Retrieved 20 August 2020.
↑ Tatiana Arias; Stefano Pozzebon. "Former Colombian President Álvaro Uribe tests positive for Covid-19 after house arrest order". CNN. Archived from the original on 2 October 2020. Retrieved 6 August 2020.
↑ "Álvaro Uribe renuncia a su curul en el Senado". El Tiempo (in Spanish). 18 August 2020. Archived from the original on 20 August 2020. Retrieved 31 August 2020.
↑ Armario, Christine (11 October 2020). "Judge orders ex-Colombian president freed from house arrest". Associated Press News. Bogotá. Archived from the original on 3 January 2022. Retrieved 26 July 2022.
↑ Pérez Becerra, Rafael (8 February 2019). "Corte reconoce a Iván Cepeda como víctima en proceso contra Álvaro Uribe". RCN Radio. Archived from the original on 31 August 2019. Retrieved 10 March 2021.
↑ "Se agita el caso Uribe". Archived from the original on 6 March 2021. Retrieved 10 March 2021.
↑ Matiz, Laura. "Detector: Fiscalía sí pidió preclusión de caso Uribe". Archived from the original on 10 March 2021. Retrieved 10 March 2021.
↑ "Colombia's ex-President Uribe charged with witness tampering in polarizing legal battle". Retrieved 26 May 2024.
↑ "Ex-Colombian president Álvaro Uribe found guilty of witness-tampering". BBC. 29 July 2025. Retrieved 29 July 2025.
↑ "Twelve years house arrest for Colombian ex-leader Álvaro Uribe". BBC. 1 August 2025.
↑ "Colombian court frees former President Uribe from house arrest until it rules on bribery case". AP News. 20 August 2025.
↑ "Colombian court strikes down former president's bribery conviction". Reuters. 21 October 2025. Retrieved 21 October 2025.
↑ "Colombia: Top Brass Linked to Extrajudicial Executions". Human Rights Watch. 24 June 2015. Retrieved 11 November 2025.
↑ "The 'False Positives' Scandal that Felled Colombia's Military Hero". Pulitzer Center. Retrieved 11 November 2025.
↑ OAS (1 August 2009). "OAS - Organization of American States: Democracy for peace, security, and development". www.oas.org. Retrieved 11 November 2025.
↑ Reports, Colombia (14 June 2019). "Extrajudicial executions statistics | Colombia Reports". Colombia News. Retrieved 11 November 2025.
1 2 "JEP imputa crímenes de guerra y lesa humanidad al general (r) Mario Montoya y ocho militares más por 130 'falsos positivos' en el oriente antioqueño". www.jep.gov.co (in Spanish). Retrieved 11 November 2025.
↑ "Colombia's Special Jurisdiction for Peace Holds First-Ever 'False Positives' Adversarial Trial | International Center for Transitional Justice". www.ictj.org. Retrieved 11 November 2025.
↑ Pannell, Alfie. "Colombian court ruling sentences 12 ex-military officers". Al Jazeera. Retrieved 11 November 2025.
↑ "Colombians head to the polls, with 2 pro-Israel candidates challenging anti-israel leftist". The Times of Israel. 31 May 2026.
↑ "Álvaro Uribe, expresidente y líder del Centro Democrático habló sobre el apoyo a De la Espriella". Noticias Caracol. 4 June 2026.
↑ "From outsider to president: Inside de la Espriella's bid to lead Colombia". Al Jazeera. 19 June 2026.
1 2 3 "Senador de la República de Colombia. 1986–1990 y 1990–1994" (in Spanish). Archived from the original on 18 November 2016. Retrieved 21 September 2020.
↑ "Álvaro Uribe es el Gran Colombiano". El Espectador. 23 June 2013. Archived from the original on 24 June 2013. Retrieved 24 June 2013.
↑ "Álvaro Uribe Vélez fue elegido como el mejor senador de 2015". El Universal (in Spanish). 21 December 2015. Archived from the original on 24 September 2017. Retrieved 21 September 2020.
↑ "El presidente de Colombia Alvaro Uribe es aplaudido por su homologo". 22 October 2004.
↑ Álvaro Uribe's Order of Isabella the Catholic appointment. Spanish Official Journal Archived 20 March 2018 at the Wayback Machine 5 February 2005. Acceded 20 March 2016
↑ Whitehouse.gov, , 13 January 2009
↑ "Resolución N° 1639/003". impo.com.uy. Archived from the original on 2 February 2021. Retrieved 30 November 2020.
↑ American Jewish Committee, "President Uribe Receives AJC Light unto the Nations Award Archived 7 August 2007 at the Wayback Machine", 4 May 2007
↑ "Presidente Álvaro Uribe recibió premio Gold Mercury por la Paz y la Seguridad 2009". El Tiempo. 23 November 2009. Archived from the original on 5 January 2016. Retrieved 5 November 2015.
↑ "Uribe gana el premio Gold Mercury de la Paz y Seguridad". El Mundo. 23 November 2009. Archived from the original on 13 January 2016. Retrieved 5 November 2015.

External links[edit]


Álvaro Uribe  at Wikipedia's sister projects

Definitions from WiktionaryMedia from CommonsQuotations from WikiquoteTexts from WikisourceTextbooks from WikibooksResources from Wikiversity

Álvaro Uribe Velez official website
Alvaro Uribe political profile on www.colombia-politics.com
Álvaro Uribe profile on Colombia Reports
Biography by CIDOB (in Spanish)
Appearances on C-SPAN
Álvaro Uribe   on Charlie Rose
Álvaro Uribe at IMDb
Álvaro Uribe collected news and commentary at The New York Times
Álvaro Uribe in genealogy wiki


Political offices


Preceded byJose Jaime Nicholls Sánchez
 Mayor of Medellín 1982
Succeeded byJuan Felipe Gaviria Gutierrez

Preceded byRamiro Valencia
 Governor of Antioquia 1995–1998
Succeeded byAlberto Builes Ortega

Preceded byAndrés Pastrana Arango
 President of Colombia 2002–2010
Succeeded byJuan Manuel Santos

Party political offices


New political party
 Colombia First nominee for President of Colombia 2002, 2006
Party dissolved 

vtePresidents of ColombiaPresidents andpresidencies
Rafael Núñez (1887–1888)
Carlos Holguín Mallarino (1888–1892)
Rafael Núñez (1882–1894)
Miguel Antonio Caro (1894–1898)
Manuel Antonio Sanclemente (1898–1900)
José Manuel Marroquín (1900–1904)
Rafael Reyes (1904–1909)
Ramón González Valencia (1909–1910)
Carlos Eugenio Restrepo (1910–1914)
José Vicente Concha (1914–1918)
Marco Fidel Suárez (1918–1921)
Jorge Holguín (1921–1922)
Pedro Nel Ospina (1922–1926)
Miguel Abadía Méndez (1926–1930)
Enrique Olaya Herrera (1930–1934)
Alfonso López Pumarejo (1934–1938)
Eduardo Santos Montejo (1938–1942)
Alfonso López Pumarejo (1942–1945)
Alberto Lleras Camargo (1945–1946)
Mariano Ospina Pérez (1946–1950)
Laureano Gómez (1950–1953)
Gustavo Rojas Pinilla (1953–1957)
Alberto Lleras Camargo (1958–1962)
Guillermo León Valencia (1962–1966)
Carlos Lleras Restrepo (1966–1970)
Misael Pastrana Borrero (1970–1974)
Alfonso López Michelsen (1974–1978)
Julio César Turbay (1978–1982)
Belisario Betancur (1982–1986)
Virgilio Barco Vargas (1986–1990)
César Gaviria (1990–1994)
Ernesto Samper (1994–1998)
Andrés Pastrana (1998–2002)
Álvaro Uribe (2002–2010)
Juan Manuel Santos (2010–2018)
Iván Duque (2018–2022)
Gustavo Petro (2022–present)

 Category
 List

vte Candidates in the 2002 Colombian presidential election
Álvaro Uribe
Horacio Serpa
Luis Eduardo Garzón
Noemí Sanín
Íngrid Betancourt
Harold Bedoya Pizarro

Portal: Colombia
Authority control databases InternationalVIAFGNDFASTWorldCatNationalUnited StatesFranceBnF dataCzech RepublicNetherlandsPolandPeopleDDBOtherIdRefYale LUX






























Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Álvaro_Uribe&oldid=1362104134"
Categories: 1952 birthsLiving peoplePoliticians from Antioquia DepartmentUniversity of Antioquia alumniHarvard Extension School alumni20th-century Colombian lawyersMayors of MedellínGovernors of Antioquia DepartmentPresidents of ColombiaCollars of the Order of Isabella the CatholicPresidential Medal of Freedom recipientsColombian Liberal Party politiciansColombian people of Basque descentColombia First politiciansColombian anti-communistsWalsh School of Foreign Service facultySocial Party of National Unity politiciansDemocratic Center (Colombia) politiciansRight-wing populism in South AmericaColombian Roman Catholics20th-century Roman Catholics21st-century Roman CatholicsHarvard Law School alumniHidden categories: Articles with short descriptionShort description is different from WikidataUse dmy dates from June 2025Pages using Template:Post-nominals with customized linkingAll articles with vague or ambiguous timeVague or ambiguous time from January 2023CS1 European Spanish-language sources (es-es)CS1 Spanish-language sources (es)All articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from June 2023BLP articles lacking sources from June 2016All BLP articles lacking sourcesArticles with unsourced statements from March 2009Wikipedia articles needing clarification from January 2023BLP articles lacking sources from August 2020Articles with unsourced statements from January 2023Articles with unsourced statements from May 2020CS1 French-language sources (fr)CS1: unfit URLArticles with unsourced statements from April 2008All articles with dead external linksArticles with dead external links from September 2024Articles with dead external links from May 2016Articles with dead external links from August 2018Articles with permanently dead external linksPages using multiple image with auto scaled imagesArticles with unsourced statements from August 2020Webarchive template wayback linksPages using Sister project links with default searchPeople appearing on C-SPAN






 This page was last edited on 1 July 2026, at 23:20 (UTC).
Page was rendered with Parsoid.
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.


Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers
Contact Wikipedia
Legal & safety contacts
Code of Conduct
Developers
Statistics
Cookie statement
Mobile view














Search













Search









Toggle the table of contents







Álvaro Uribe




























54 languages


Add topic

Presidency of Álvaro Uribe - Wikipedia






























Jump to content







Main menu





Main menu
move to sidebar
hide



		Navigation
	


Main pageContentsCurrent eventsRandom articleAbout WikipediaContact us





		Contribute
	


HelpLearn to editCommunity portalRecent changesUpload fileSpecial pages



















Search











Search






















Appearance
















Donate

Create account

Log in








Personal tools






Donate


Create account


Log in





























Contents
move to sidebar
hide




(Top)





1
Election








2
Inauguration








3
Domestic policy




Toggle Domestic policy subsection





3.1
Security








3.2
Paramilitarism








3.3
Economy








3.4
Agriculture








3.5
Judiciary










4
Foreign affairs








5
References


















Toggle the table of contents







Presidency of Álvaro Uribe



1 language




Español

Edit links











ArticleTalk





English

















Read

Edit

View history









Tools





Tools
move to sidebar
hide



		Actions
	



Read


Edit


View history






		General
	


What links hereRelated changesUpload filePermanent linkPage informationCite this pageGet shortened URLSwitch to legacy parser





		Print/export
	


Download as PDFPrintable version





		In other projects
	


Wikidata item






















Appearance
move to sidebar
hide










From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia



Colombian presidential administration from 2002 to 2010

Presidency of Álvaro UribeAugust 7, 2002 – August 7, 2010CabinetSee listPartyColombia FirstElection20022006SeatCasa de Nariño← Andres PastranaJuan Manuel Santos →
 Seal of the PresidentOfficial website
Álvaro Uribe's term as the 31st president of Colombia began with his first inauguration on August 7, 2002 and ended on August 7, 2010. Uribe, candidate of the Colombia First party of Antioquia, took office after a decisive victory about the Liberal candidate Horacio Serpa in the 2002 presidential election. Four years later, in the 2006 presidential election, he defeated the Democratic Pole candidate, Carlos Gaviria, to win re-election. Uribe is the first president not to represent either of the two traditional parties, Liberal and Conservative.
Election[edit]
Main articles: 2002 Colombian presidential election and 2006 Colombian presidential election
Álvaro Uribe, who had been a member of the Liberal party, ran in the 2002 presidential elections initially as a candidate for his group. However, the candidate alleged a lack of guarantees to compete against former minister and former presidential candidate Horacio Serpa, for which he presented himself as an independent candidate.
His main contenders were Serpa, representing the Liberal Party; former union leader Luis Eduardo Garzón for the Independent Democratic Pole, former minister Noemí Sanín for the Yes, Colombia Movement and senator Íngrid Betancourt for the Green Oxygen Party. Several liberal leaders and the Conservative Party (which in those elections withdrew from the candidacy of former minister Juan Camilo Restrepo) gave their support to Uribe.[1]
The elections were held in the midst of a strong security device in the face of threats from the FARC-EP since they found the population that did not come to vote in said election.[2]
Inauguration[edit]
Main articles: First inauguration of Álvaro Uribe and Second inauguration of Álvaro Uribe
Uribe was elected president of Colombia for the period 2002-2006 with 53% of the total votes (5,862,655 votes), defeating his main contender, Serpa, who obtained 31.8% of the votes (3,514,779 votes).; becoming the first president to win the elections in the first round since the measure was established in the 1991 Constitution. According to the National Registry of Civil Status, participation in the elections was 46,471% (11,249,734 people) of the electoral census .[3]
Later it was learned that Uribe's campaign received 100 million pesos from the Uniapuestas company, in which Enilce López (alias "La Gata") was the majority shareholder.[4] Later, López was captured and charged with various criminal charges. for money laundering and diversion of funds, related to other judicial processes, despite this López has denied knowing about the check for Uribe's campaign.[5] However, Uribe stated that no illegal conduct was incurred since in the 2002 Enilce López's companies were legally constituted.[6]
On August 7, 2002, Uribe's inauguration as president took place in the Palacio de Nariño, the FARC-EP attacked near said building, leaving a balance of 17 people dead and another 20 injured by the explosion of a cylinder-pump; four spell mortars, two of them hit the Presidential Guard battalion, leaving a policeman and a soldier injured, another in the Nariño Palace, and the other in the El Cartucho sector, four blocks from the presidential palace.[7]
The Uribe CabinetOfficeNameTermPresidentÁlvaro Uribe2002–2010Vice PresidentFrancisco Santos2002–2010InteriorFernando Londoño2002–2004Sabas Pretelt2003–2006Carlos Holguín2006–2008Fabio Valencia2008–2010Foreign AffairsCarolina Barco2002–2006María Consuelo Araújo2006–2007Fernando Araújo2007–2008Jaime Bermúdez2008–2010FinanceRoberto Junguito2002–2003Alberto Carrasquilla2003–2007Óscar Iván Zuluaga2007–2010DefenseMarta Lucía Ramírez2002–2003Jorge Alberto Uribe2003–2005Camilo Ospina Bernal2005–2006Juan Manuel Santos2006–2009AgricultureCarlos Gustavo Cano2002–2005Andrés Felipe Arias2005–2009Andrés Fernández Acosta2009–2010LabourJuan Luis Londoño2002–2003Diego Palacio2003–2010EnergyLuis Ernesto Mejía2002–2006Hernán Martínez2006–2010CommerceJorge Humberto Botero2002–2007Luis Guillermo Plata2007–2010EducationCecilia María Vélez2002–2010EnvironmentCecilia Rodríguez2022–2006Juan Lozano Ramírez2006–2009TelecommunicationsMartha Pinto de Hart2002–2006María del Rosario Guerra2006–Daniel Medina2010–2010TransportAndrés Uriel Gallego2002–2010CulturePaula Moreno2007–2010
Domestic policy[edit]
Security[edit]
As president, Uribe promoted his democratic security policy (PSD) centered on two axes.[8] On the one hand, in recovering control of the territory from the State with the creation of high mountain battalions, of peasant soldier platoons, which they accompanied the National Police in several municipalities, cooperation networks and the offer of rewards to informants. On the other, in attacking the rear guards of the guerrillas.[8]
The PSD included an increase in the budget assigned to national defense; the increase in the force foot, the creation and endowment of new operational units, the purchase of airplanes and helicopters, and the arrival in urban centers with National Police stations; the professionalization and strengthening of the public force, the creation of joint commands, the Headquarters of joint special operations and elite groups of police and army; the increase and strengthening of intelligence, among others.[9] In addition, Uribe consolidated an alliance with the United States so that the Colombian conflict was included in the war against terrorism, led by US President George W. Bush. Likewise, in October 2002, Uribe suggested creating a contingent of Colombian blue helmets to provide security to displaced persons in Colombia and help them return to their original homes.[10]
However, in 2003 the Uribe government was criticized for the frustrated rescue attempt of a group of hostages in the hands of the FARC-EP, who, upon noticing the operation, executed the hostages; the governor of Antioquia, Guillermo Gaviria; former Defense Minister Gilberto Echeverri and eight soldiers.[11] Military operations in urban centers were also criticized, such as Operation Orión in 2002 in Comuna 13 in Medellín, which left several people missing.[12][13]
Continuing with the PSD, in mid-2003, Uribe moved to the department of Arauca, after serious public order problems arose due to the violence and poverty in the area. The border region with Venezuela was affected by the FARC-EP and the paramilitaries of the United Self-Defense Forces of Colombia (AUC). Uribe governed as president together with his ministers from the city of Arauca.[14] On September 1 of the same year, Uribe also had to travel to the city of Cúcuta for reasons of public order. In addition to the FARC-EP and the AUC, the ELN also had a presence in the border area with Venezuela. In March 2003, a vehicle loaded with explosives had exploded in Cúcuta, leaving 13 dead and more than 60 injured.[14]
A balance on Uribe's first year as president presented by the Colombian Military Forces, the fight against the guerrillas showed positive results with 1,943 deaths and 8,109 detainees, all this in 1,630 combats fought with the army since August 2002.[15] However, various organizations released a book called "The Authoritarian Haunt". The report claimed that Uribe had broken his promises made in the presidential campaign and his policies were violating International Humanitarian Law (IHL).[16] Uribe responded to his detractors by classifying them into three types "... theoretical critics that we respect but do not share his thesis of weakness. Some serious human rights organizations, which we respect and welcome, with which we will maintain a permanent dialogue to improve what needs to be improved... some human rights traffickers who should remove their mask once and for all, appear with their political ideas and stop that cowardice of hiding their political ideas behind human rights. Uribe described the latter as collaborators of the terrorists who used human rights for their purposes.[16]
In this context several attacks against Uribe were presented. The first of these, attributed to the FARC-EP, occurred in February 2003 when a charge of dynamite exploded in Neiva at the time when police officers and the Prosecutor's Office carried out a security operation prior to Uribe's arrival at that city, leaving 18 dead and 45 injured as a result.[17] This did not prevent kidnappings from 2,986 to 800 per year during his first presidency; homicides fell by 40.6 percent and the number of terrorist attacks, 62.5 percent; Assaults on towns went from 32 in 2002 to 5 in 2005.
Paramilitarism[edit]
As part of democratic security, during Uribe's term he sought to negotiate with illegal groups such as the FARC-EP, the ELN and the AUC. The dialogues with the FARC-EP and the ELN did not have major consequences in the political field, but an increase in the desertion of those groups outside the law was seen, partly due to the demobilization policy. Negotiations with the leaders of said organizations were carried out with the AUC, which led to the process of demobilization of paramilitaries in Colombia, which was questioned by several critics who feared that the conditions were not sufficient to prevent a degree of impunity from existing around matters such as crimes against humanity or drug trafficking,[18] as well as reparation for victims.[19]
In June 2005, Clara López, leader of the Polo Democrático Alternativo (PDA) denounced the alleged links of congressmen with the United Self-Defense Forces of Colombia (AUC), after the statement by Salvatore Mancuso in which he stated that 35 percent of the Congress of the Republic of Colombia were friends of his organization.[20] From that moment on, a series of investigations were unleashed in Colombia that compromised various political allies and some officials of the Uribe government with illegal Colombian paramilitary groups in what was called the "Parapolitics". According to the investigations, several political leaders would have benefited from these alliances through intimidation and armed action by paramilitary groups against the civilian population; some would have presumably reached positions in mayors' offices, councils, municipal assemblies and governorships, as well as in the Congress of the Republic and other higher state bodies. At the same time, some of the politicians and officials from their posts would have diverted money for the financing and formation of illegal armed groups and would have leaked information to facilitate and benefit the actions of these groups, which include massacres, selective assassinations, forced displacements and other criminal actions.[21]
At the same time, during Uribe's term there were notable acts of massacres and forced disappearances by paramilitary groups, for which his government was accused several times of having been "soft" with the paramilitaries because this favored the fight against the guerrilla groups.[22] Uribe considered for his part that the demobilization of the AUC led the entire leadership of said organization to jail.[23]
According to researchers from the Javeriana University, analyzing the right to compliance with judicial truth consigned in the Santa Fe de Ralito Agreement, they found that the quality of this factor was low at 44%, medium at 55% and high at 1%. Up to now, it has been an instrument with few guarantees of truth, justice, reparation and non-repetition by the AUC.[24]
Economy[edit]
According to figures consigned in the 2005 balance of the National Development Plan, the Gross Domestic Product (GDP) grew 5.75 percent and the unemployment rate went from 15.7 to 11.8
In August 2002, the Uribe government imposed as a measure to finance the armed conflict in Colombia the wealth tax to "address the necessary expenses to attend to democratic security",[25] determining that the taxpayers of the tax would be all income taxpayers with net worth of more than 169.5 million Colombian pesos at the time. The rate of said tax was 1.2%, being collected only once (in four installments). The collection reached 2.52 trillion pesos, including voluntary contributions, totaling 315,338 people, between companies and individuals.[26]
On the other hand, to promote the tourism industry, the Uribe government organized tourist routes protected by public forces. The initiative was led by the Ministry of Commerce, Industry and Tourism in alliance with the National Army, the National Police and the Ministry of Transportation. These routes were called "Las Caravanas Vive Colombia" as part of the democratic security program proposed by Uribe.[27]
Agriculture[edit]
During Uribe's second term, more than 316,000 peasant producer families were beneficiaries of the Agro Ingreso Seguro (AIS) program.[28] However, in October 2008 a scandal broke out when the magazine Cambio denounced that the AIS had given subsidies to borrowers, among them they Mario Uribe, the president's cousin.[29] Other beneficiaries gave money to uribista initiatives; 45 contributors to the 2002 presidential campaign and 10 to the campaign of the failed referendum for Uribe's third re-election.[30] This led the Colombian government to try to obtain the return of money from AIS in 2009.[31]
As a consequence of the embezzlement, the then Minister of Agriculture Andrés Felipe Arias, Uribe's possible political successor as a candidate for the presidency, was investigated by the attorney general's office, which disqualified him from holding public office for 16 years.[32][33] He was subsequently arrested and accused of the crimes of embezzlement for appropriation in favor of third parties and entering into contracts without complying with legal requirements.[34] The Superior Court of Bogotá initially ordered his arrest in 2011, however in 2013 he was granted provisional release while he was advancing his trial.[35] He was later sentenced by the Supreme Court of Justice to 17 years in prison and to pay a fine of 30,800 million pesos.70 Initially he fled as a fugitive from justice in the United States[36] where he was arrested by federal authorities in compliance with a red notice from Interpol. Uribe's former minister tried to request political asylum arguing that he was the victim of political persecution and that he could be a victim of torture, but his allegations were rejected by a federal judge and he was later extradited to Colombia. Upon his return to Colombia, his image was publicly hidden and despite being convicted of corruption, he was housed in a private home on a military base, receiving privileged treatment. The Government of Iván Duque in line with Uribe has allowed the former minister to leave his prison and enjoy special privileges while requesting his formal acquittal in court.[37][38]
Judiciary[edit]
Relations between the executive and judicial branches during the Uribe government, and particularly with the Supreme Court of Justice, were tense, especially in his second term. The two powers have accused each other of conspiracy, especially as a result of the Parapolitics scandal, the Yidispolítica scandal and the non-election of the attorney general by the High Courts from the shortlist sent by the President of the Republic, according to the Political Constitution.[39][40]
Foreign affairs[edit]
In January 2003, Uribe gave statements to Caracol Radio where he asked the United States to make a military deployment in Colombia, "equivalent to the one being prepared in the Persian Gulf," he mentioned in relation to the Iraq War.[41] In March, Uribe decided support as a representative of Colombia the invasion of Iraq.
Regarding the United Nations Organization (UN), in December 2002 Colombia was selected to preside over the Security Council.[42]
Political relations with Venezuela were initially cordial, although they deteriorated at times due to the traditional border conflict in the Gulf of Venezuela. Uribe's support for Bush and policies such as Democratic Security were seen by supporters of Hugo Chávez's government and himself as a threat to the Bolivarian Revolution.[43]
One of the most tense situations arose as a result of the Rodrigo Granda case. But in 2007 relations between the two presidents deteriorated definitively after Uribe authorized Hugo Chávez's mediation in the Humanitarian Agreement and three months later interrupted said mediation. This incident caused a verbal confrontation between the leaders through statements and public statements that ended up undermining relations that had been cordial until now.[44]
In 2008, relations with the President of Ecuador, Rafael Correa, deteriorated due to Operation Fénix, an incursion of the Colombian Military Forces into Ecuadorian territory, in which the FARC-EP commander alias "Raúl" was killed. Reyes" and ties of said organization with members of various international governments were found in the computers of Raúl Reyes.[45]
On other issues, his government has kept out of the position of the United States, among them by maintaining bilateral relations with Cuba and not supporting motions against that nation at the UN.[46][47]
References[edit]

↑ "Giro de los Conservadores, Álvaro Uribe". eltiempo.com. 13 March 2002. Retrieved 17 November 2016.
↑ "Amplio triunfo de Uribe en Colombia". news.bbc.co.uk. 27 May 2002. Retrieved 11 December 2014.
↑ "Informe de votación". Registraduria Nacional del Estado Civil. 7 June 2002. Archived from the original on 1 October 2007. Retrieved 3 January 2017.
↑ "'La Gata' Enilce López, la caída de un imperio". las2orillas.co. 22 January 2014. Retrieved 3 January 2017.
↑ "La Gata negó saber de cheque para la campaña de Uribe". eltiempo.com. 18 February 2006. Retrieved 16 January 2015.
↑ "'La Gata' sí aportó a campaña de Uribe". eltiempo.com. 11 February 2006. Retrieved 3 January 2017.
↑ "17 muertos en ataque cercano a palacio presidencial de Colombia". Diario del Pueblo. 8 August 2002. Retrieved 3 January 2017.
1 2 "Seguridad democrática". Semana. 18 September 2005. Retrieved 3 January 2017.
↑ Razón Pública. "Lo bueno, lo malo y lo feo de la Seguridad Democrática". Retrieved 11 December 2014.
↑ "Uribe quiere cascos azules colombianos". El Universo. 4 October 2002. Retrieved 3 January 2017.
↑ "Críticas a Uribe por el fallido rescate". La Nación. 7 May 2003. Retrieved 3 January 2017.
↑ "Batalla campal en Medellín". El Tiempo. 17 October 2002. Retrieved 23 October 2015.
↑ "La foto que destapó los desmanes de la operación Orión". Semana. 15 October 2015. Retrieved 23 October 2015.
1 2 "Colombia: Uribe gobierna en Cúcuta". BBC. 1 September 2003. Retrieved 3 January 2017.
↑ "Operativos militares: 365 días". BBC. 6 August 2003. Retrieved 3 January 2017.
1 2 Héctor, Latorre (9 September 2003). "Colombia/Uribe: críticas de DDHH". BBC. Retrieved 3 January 2017.
↑ "Se cumplen seis años del atentado de Villa Magdalena en Neiva". El Tiempo. 13 February 2009. Retrieved 3 January 2017.
↑ "¿Qué tanto ha funcionado Justicia y Paz?". www.semana.com. Retrieved 23 October 2015.
↑ "Las amargas lecciones que dejó la desmovilización de las Auc". Verdad Abierta. 8 November 2015. Retrieved 3 January 2017.
↑ "El escándalo de la 'parapolítica' en Colombia". El País. 20 February 2007. Retrieved 3 January 2017.
↑ "Las pruebas hablan por sí solas". Semana. 11 November 2006. Retrieved 3 January 2017.
↑ Rangel, Alfredo (21 May 2004). "O los paramilitares o la seguridad democrática". El Tiempo. Archived from the original on 26 November 2015. Retrieved 23 October 2015.
↑ Cruz, Iván (8 August 2007). "Álvaro Uribe: "Mi gobierno ha desmontado el paramilitarismo"". Magazine. Terra Networks. Archived from the original on 5 January 2017. Retrieved 3 January 2017.
↑ Salazar, Juan Sebastian. "Las verdades de Justicia y Paz". Pesquisa Javeriana. Retrieved 22 February 2021.
↑ Presidencia de la República de Colombia. "Decreto Presidencial 1828 del 11 de agosto de 2002" (PDF). Retrieved 27 November 2017.
↑ "Con nuevo impuesto de guerra se espera recaudar 3 billones de pesos en dos años". Portafolio. 7 July 2006. Retrieved 4 January 2017.
↑ "Caravanas turísticas, Vive Colombia". Ministerio de Comercio, Industria y Turismo de Colombia. 11 April 2004. Archived from the original on 4 January 2017. Retrieved 3 January 2017.
↑ "316.000 familias beneficiadas con Agro Ingreso Seguro". Colombia. Instituro Colombiano Agropecuario. 25 September 2009. Retrieved 9 February 2015.
↑ Restrepo, Juan Diego (6 November 2009). "Hasta Mario Uribe se benefició con Agro Ingreso Seguro". Semana. Retrieved 17 November 2016.
↑ "Estos son los 51 beneficiarios de Agro Ingreso Seguro que aportaron a campañas de Uribe". La Silla Vacía. Retrieved 9 February 2016. Lista de beneficiarios AIS que aportaron a campaña de Uribe 2002 y al referendo
↑ "Gobierno ordena devolución de dineros de Agro Ingreso Seguro". El Espectador. 8 November 2009. Archived from the original on 17 December 2009. Retrieved 22 July 2015.
↑ "Destituido Andrés Felipe Arias". El Espectador. Archived from the original on 24 September 2015. Retrieved 9 February 2016.
↑ "Andrés Felipe Arias: del esplendor a la condena". Semana. Retrieved 9 February 2016.
↑ "¿Por qué Andrés Felipe Arias terminó en la cárcel?". El Heraldo (Colombia). Retrieved 9 February 2016.
↑ "Andrés Felipe Arias recobra su libertad". Semana. Retrieved 9 February 2016.
↑ "Corte condena a Arias a 17 años de cárcel; está prófugo en EE. UU". El Tiempo. Retrieved 9 February 2016.
↑ Semana (12 July 2019). "Andrés Felipe Arias extraditado. ¿Y ahora qué viene?". Semana.com   Últimas Noticias de Colombia y el Mundo (in Spanish). Retrieved 26 May 2021.
↑ "Mientras a los presos de la modelo los matan, Arias está aislado y protegido del Coronavirus".
↑ El País. "Se agudiza conflicto entre Gobierno y Cortes por terna para Fiscal". Retrieved 12 December 2014.
↑ Caracol Radio. "Uribe admite roces con el poder judicial". Retrieved 12 December 2014.
↑ "Uribe pide un despliegue militar de EE UU en Colombia como en Irak". El País. 16 January 2003. Retrieved 4 January 2017.
↑ Pardo, Rodrigo (1 December 2002). "A qué viene Colin Powell". El Tiempo. Archived from the original on 23 October 2016. Retrieved 4 January 2017.
↑ Libertad Digital. "Chávez-Uribe: cruce de insultos". Retrieved 12 December 2014.
↑ ""Round" verbal entre Uribe y Chávez". Archived from the original on 3 December 2008. Retrieved 18 December 2007.
↑ "Uribe utilizó archivos de 'Raúl Reyes' para vincular a Chávez y Correa con las FARC". El Mundo. 22 May 2011. Retrieved 17 November 2016.
↑ "¿La votación de la ONU condenará el bloqueo contra Cuba o a Obama?". Cubadebate. 27 October 2009. Retrieved 17 November 2016.
↑ Fernando, Ravsberg (5 November 2009). "La soledad del Nobel". BBC. Retrieved 17 November 2016.













Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Presidency_of_Álvaro_Uribe&oldid=1337194054"
Categories: Presidency of Álvaro UribePresidencies of Colombia2002 establishments in Colombia2008 disestablishments in Colombia2000s in ColombiaÁlvaro UribeHidden categories: Articles with short descriptionShort description is different from WikidataUse dmy dates from December 2022Official website not in WikidataCS1 Spanish-language sources (es)






 This page was last edited on 8 February 2026, at 00:43 (UTC).
Page was rendered with Parsoid.
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.


Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers
Contact Wikipedia
Legal & safety contacts
Code of Conduct
Developers
Statistics
Cookie statement
Mobile view














Search













Search









Toggle the table of contents







Presidency of Álvaro Uribe




























1 language


Add topic

Uribe DJ - Wikipedia






























Jump to content







Main menu





Main menu
move to sidebar
hide



		Navigation
	


Main pageContentsCurrent eventsRandom articleAbout WikipediaContact us





		Contribute
	


HelpLearn to editCommunity portalRecent changesUpload fileSpecial pages



















Search











Search






















Appearance
















Donate

Create account

Log in








Personal tools






Donate


Create account


Log in





























Contents
move to sidebar
hide




(Top)





1
Radio








2
Television








3
Awards








4
References








5
External links


















Toggle the table of contents







Uribe DJ



1 language




مصرى

Edit links











ArticleTalk





English

















Read

Edit

View history









Tools





Tools
move to sidebar
hide



		Actions
	



Read


Edit


View history






		General
	


What links hereRelated changesUpload filePermanent linkPage informationCite this pageGet shortened URLSwitch to legacy parser





		Print/export
	


Download as PDFPrintable version





		In other projects
	


Wikidata item






















Appearance
move to sidebar
hide










From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia



Uribe DjUribe DJ broadcasting from Estéreo Picnic Festival 2014BornÁlvaro Uribe (1973-03-09) March 9, 1973 (age 53)Cali, ColombiaOccupationRadio personYears active1996–presentWebsitehttps://uribedj.co
Álvaro Uribe, known as Uribe Dj, (born March 9, 1973) is a Colombian radio personality, Voice-over artist and television host. Uribe has hosted programs on English and Spanish language at radio stations in Colombia like The X 103.9 FM, Movistar Radio, La Mega 90.9 FM and 88.9 FM. In June 2013, he started to host the television show Aldea TIC on Canal Tr3ce.[1][2]
He is the director of the radio station LA 92 in Colombia and host of the radio show ONE2FIVE on The X 103.9 FM Colombia.
Radio[edit]
Uribe was born in Cali, and studied at Pontifical Xavierian University in Bogotá. He started his radio career working for La Mega 90.9 FM in Colombia, where he produced the show "El Mañanero" for ten years.
In 2003 he worked for 88.9 FM as the host of a show called Navegantes.
In 2007 he was the creator and director of "Movistar Radio", an online radio station implemented for the company Movistar - Telefónica of Spain.[3]
In 2010 he becomes the host of the show "ONE2FIVE" at The X 103.9 FM in Colombia. He is also the Radio programmer for the station.[4]
Television[edit]
In television he started working in the early 2000s with RCN TV channel, hosting a show called "Los Elegidos" with Colombian model Catalina Maya and TV presenter Carolina Delgado.
He worked with Caracol TV network, as part of the entertainment department. 
He was the voice-over and creative writer for the shows "También Caerás", "Wako Wako" and "Animexpress" for almost two years.
In 2003 he was invited as a judge in the reality TV show "Mi Otro Yo" for the channel CityTV.
In 2013 he started hosting the television show "Aldea TIC" on Canal Tr3ce, a show about technology and entertainment.
In late 2020 he created the pop culture show "Pop Corner".
Awards[edit]
Cannes Lions Publicity Awards 2009.
 France, 2009.
 Project: Movistar Radio.
 Brand: Movistar-Telefónica de España. 
 Alongside Sístole publicity agency in Colombia.
 Category: Digital.
 GOLD.
Cannes Lions Publicity Awards 2013.
 France, 2013. 
 Campaign: ¿What Does ABSOLUT Sounds Like?
 Brand: ABSOLUT. 
 Alongside PHD publicity agency in Colombia.
 Category: Media.
 SILVER.
P&M Advertising and Marketing Award 2013.
 Colombia, 2013.
 Campaign: ¿What Does ABSOLUT Sounds Like? 
 Brand: ABSOLUT 
 Alongside PHD publicity agency in Colombia.
 Category: Media.
 GOLD.
References[edit]

↑ "Uribe llegó a Aldea TIC" [Uribe arrives at Aldea TIC]. canal13.com.co (in Spanish). 2 November 2013.
↑ "Final de la tercera temporada de Aldea TIC" [Aldea TIC ends its third season]. canal13.com.co (in Spanish). 2 December 2013.
↑ "Movistar Colombia, la primera empresa en el país en lanzar una emisora de radio, vía Internet" [Movistar Colombia, the first brand in the country to launch an online radio station.] (PDF). movistar.co (in Spanish). 2 October 2014. Archived from the original (PDF) on 6 October 2014. Retrieved 1 October 2014.
↑ "ONE2FIVE con Uribe Dj" [ONE2FIVE With Uribe Dj.]. laxmasmusica.com (in Spanish). 2 October 2014.

External links[edit]
Website












Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Uribe_DJ&oldid=1343590359"
Categories: 1973 birthsLiving peoplePeople from BogotáColombian radio presentersColombian television presentersHidden categories: Articles with hCardsCS1 Spanish-language sources (es)






 This page was last edited on 15 March 2026, at 06:27 (UTC).
Page was rendered with Parsoid.
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.


Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers
Contact Wikipedia
Legal & safety contacts
Code of Conduct
Developers
Statistics
Cookie statement
Mobile view














Search













Search









Toggle the table of contents







Uribe DJ




























1 language


Add topic